• QI::IJe .seconb 
'1Boie or tbe communication 
of Raphael Hythlodaye, concernyng 
the best state of a common wealthe : con­
teynyng the discription of Vtopia, 
with a large declaration of the 
Godly• gouernement, and of 
all the good Iawes and 
orders of the same 
Ilande. 
The Ilande of Vtopia conteyneth in breadthe in the 
myddell part of it (for there it is brodest) CC. 
Whiche bredthe continueth through the moste parte of the 
Iande, sauyng that by lytle and lytle it commeth in and 
• politike. and B. have the shorter title : Reip. 
\ 12 
JI6 (CH. 
waxeth narrower towardes both the endes. Whiche fetch­
ynge about a circuite or compasse of .v.c.1 myles, do fas­
sion the hole Ilande lyke to the newe mone 11• Betwene 
thys two corners the sea runneth in, diuydyng them a 
sonder by the distaunce of .xi. miles or there aboutes, and 
there surmounteth into a large and wyde sea 3, which, by 
reason that the Iande of euery syde compasseth it about, 
and shiltreth it from the windes, is not rough nor mountith 
not with great waues, but almost floweth quietlye, not 
muche vnlike a great standing powle ; and maketh almoste • 
al the space within the bellye of the Iande in maner of 
a hauen; and to the great commoditie of the Inhabitauntes 
receaueth in shyppes towardes euery parte of the Iande. 
The forefrontes or frontiers of the .ii. corners, what wythe 
fordys and shelues, and what with rocl_<.es, be very ieoperd­
ous and daungerous 5• In the middel distaunce betwene 
• welnieghe. 71 
1 That is, five hundred. 
' The editions of 1516 and 1518 
illustrate this description by a woodcut, 
giving a bird's-eye view of the island, 
which was reproduced, in smaller size, 
in the Luculmlliones of 1563. See the 
Introduction, § s. 
• The island is conceived of as 
something in the shape of a horse­
shoe, the two ends of it only eleven 
miles apart. Between these extremi­
ties, as between two projecting moles 
of a harbour, the sea flows in, ex­
panding on the concave side of the 
crescent into a vast, sheltered hay. ' The verb (//igian is found in 
Prudentius See also the Cor11ueopia• 
(ed. '754· 
• As a fair specimen of the dif­
ference in style between the older 
translation and Burnet's, and also 
as helping to make the description 
clearer, the opening section in Bur­
net's rendering may be given here:­
• The Island of Utopia is in the Middle 
two hundred Miles broad, and holds 
almost at the same Breadth over a 
great Part of it ; but it grows narrower 
towards both Ends. Its Figure is not 
unlike a Crescent : Between its Horns 
CR. I 17 
them both standeth vp aboue the water a great rocke, 
which therfore is nothing perillous bicause it is in sight. 
Vpon the top of this rocke is a faire and a strong towre 
builded, which thei holde with a garison of men. Other 
rockes ther be, that lye • hidde vnder the water, and b there­
fore be daungerous. The channelles be knowen onely to 
themselfes. An 1 therfore it seldome chaunceth that any 
straunger, oneles he be guided by a Vtopian, can come 
in to this hauen. In so muche that they themselfes could 
skaselie entre without ieoperdie, but that their way is 
directed and ruled by certaine Iande markes standing on 
the shore. By turning, translatynge 2, and remouinge this 
markes into other places, they maye destroye their enemies 
nauies, be thei neuer so many 1• ·The out side ofo the 
Iande is also full of hauens; but the landing is so surely 
• lyinge. • which. • or vtter circuite of. 
the Sea comes in eleven Miles broad, 
and spreads itself into a great Bay, 
which is environcd with Land to the 
Compass of about five Hundred Miles, 
and is well secured from Winds : In 
this Bay there is no great Current ; 
the whole Coast is, as it were, one 
continued Harbour, which gives all 
that live in the Island great Conve­
nience for mutual Commerce : But the 
Entry into the Bay, occasioned by 
Rocks on the one hand, and Shallows 
on the other, is very dangerous.' 1 Still used provincially for • and.' 
• That is, transferring, or changing. 
The word is still used in its literal 
sense of changes in episcopal sees. 
The reader will be inclined to apos­
trophize the one poor Latin term, 
tratUlam, in the words of Quince to 
Bottom, as he marks how Robynson 
struggles with it. 
• On this and other repellent features 
of the Utopian character, as drawn 
by More, see the Introduction, 1 4, 
p. 
118 «be seconn 15oke [Ca. 
defenced •, what by nature and what by workmanshyp of 
mans hande, that a fewe defenders maye dryue backe 
many armies. 
Howbeit, as they saye, and as the fassion of the place it 
selfe doth partely shewe, it was not euer compassed about 
with the sea. But kyng Vtopus, whose name as con· 
querour the Iland beereth (for before that b tyme it was 
called Abraxa 1), which also brought the rude and wild 
people to that excellent perfection, in al good fassions, 
humanitie, and ciuile gentilnes, wherin they now go be· 
yond al the people of the world ; euen at his first arriuinge 
and enteringe vpon the lande, furth with obteynynge the 
victory caused .xv. myles space of vplandyshe grounde, 
where the sea had no passage, to be cut and dygged vp ; 
and so brought the sea rounde aboute the lande. He set 
to thys worke not only the inhabitauntes of the Ilande 
(because they should not thynke it done in contumelye and 
• fenced. b his. 
-----------------
1 It is not easy to say whether 
More had any special idea in his mind, 
when he devised this name. He may 
have intended to express the notion 
of roughness or ruggedness, as Strabo 
did by his derivation of the river-name Arues. Or possibly, as he calls 
the name of the river of Amaurote 
' Waterless • (Anydrus ), he may have 
meant something of the same kind 
by Abraxa, as if • A/Jp«nor, ' not rained 
upon.' 
CH. I I9 
despyte), but also all hys owne soldiours. Thus the 
worke, beyng diuyded into so great a numbre of worke­
men, was with exceding maruelous spede dyspatched. In 
so muche that the borderers, whiche at the fyrst began 
to mocke and to gieste at thys vayne enterpryse, then 
turned theyr laughter to marueyle at the successe, and 
to feare. 
There be in the Ilande .liiii.1 large and faire cities or 
shiere townes, agreyng all together in one tonge, in lyke 
maners, institucions, and Iawes. They be all set and 
situate a lyke, and in all poyntes fashioned a lyke, as 
farfurth as the place or plotte suffereth. Of thies cyties 
they that be nighest together be xxiiii. 
Again there is none of them distaunt from the next aboue 
one dayes iorneye a fote. 
There cum yearly to Amaurote out of euery cytie .iii. 
olde men, wyse and well experienced, there to entreate and 
sed suos praeterea milites omnes adiungeret, in tantam hominum 
multitudinem opere distributo, incredibili celeritate res perfecta ; 
finitiinosque • (qui initio uanitatem incoepti riserant) admiratione: 
successus ac terrore perculerit. • inter se sunt, A. 
·------------------------ -------
1 In England and Wales togetller 
we new reckon fifty-two shires; but 
in Harrison's E11glaruJ (ed. ¢, 97, the number is 
given as fifty-three. Monmouthshire 
is there classed as a Welsh county, 
making thirteen; and the county of Richemond, in place of it, keeps up the 
English number to forty. As under­
sheriff' of London, More mq have 
been often reminded that the . City 
was a county in itself ; and thus, 
perhaps, his number of fifty-four was 
made up. 
debate of the common matters of the Iande. For thys 
cytie (because it standeth iust in the myddes of the 
Ilande, and is therfore moste mete for the embassadours 
of all partes of the realme) is taken for the chiefe and head 
cytie. The precinctes and boundes of the shieres be so 
commodiously appoynted out, and set furth for the cyties, 
that neuer a one a of them all hath of any~ syde lesse then 
xx. myles of grounde, and of som syde also muche more 1, 
as of that part where the cyties be of farther distaunce 
a sonder. None of the cities desire to enlarge the boundes 
and lymites of their shieres 1• For they count them selfes 
rather the good husbandes, then the owners of their 
Iandes. 
They haue in the countrey in all partes of the shiere 
howses or fermes buylded, wei appointed and furnyshed 
with all sortes of instrumentes and tooles belongyng to 
husbandrie. Thies houses be inhabited of the cytezens, 
whiche cum thyther to dwel by course. No howsholde 
• th .. 
1 But yet, as said before, so as 
not to exceed a day's journey on 
foot. 
• The marginal note in the Latin calls attention to this love of territorial 
aggrandizement as one of the great 
plagues of the time. See above, p. 1.] Of Utopia. 121 
or ferme in the countrey hath fewer then .xl.1 persones, 
men and women, besydes two bonden men, whiche be all 
vnder the rule and order of the good man and the good 
wyfe of the house, beynge bothe very sage and discrete • 
persones. And euery .xxx. fermes or famelies hauc one 
heade ,ruler, whiche is called a Phylarche 1, being as it 
were a hed baytyffe. Out of euery one of thies famelies 
or fermes cummeth euery yeare into the cytie .xx. per­
sones whiche haue contynewed .ii. yeres before in the 
countrey. In their place so manye freshe be sent thither 
out of the citie 3, whiche of them that haue bene there 
a yeare all ready, and be therfore expert and conninge in 
husbandry, shalbe instructed and taught ; and they the 
next yeare shall teache other. This order is vsed, for 
feare that other skarsenes of victualles or some other like 
incommoditie shuld chaunce through lacke of knowledge, 
yf they should be al together newe and fresh and vn· 
experte in husbandrie. This maner and fassion of yearlye 
chaunginge and renewinge the occupiers of husbandrie, 
• discrete and aunciente. 1134) this is for some 
reuon given as • fifty persons.' 
' See the note below, p. The 
description of this officer as a sort of 
head bailifF, is inserted by Robynson 
from what More says a little later on. 1 The benefit of such an altema· 
tion of town and country life, where 
attainable, is obvious. 
Morris's Nlflls .from Nor~~hww, rllgo, 
p. 19-
, The word agrico/otio is found in 
Columella. 
122 (CR. 
though it be solempne and customablie vsed, to thintent 
that no man shall be constrayned against his wil to con­
tynewe Ionge in that harde and sharpe 1 kynde of lyfe, yet 
manye of them haue suche a pleasure and delete in hus­
bandrye, that they obteyne a longer space of yeares. 
Thies husbandmen plowe and till the grounde, and bryde z 
vp cattell, and make • readye woode, whiche they carrye 
to the cytie, other by Iande or by water, as they maye 
moste conuenyently. They brynge vp a greate multytude 
of pulleyne, and that by a meruelous policie. For the 
hennes doo not syt vpon the egges : but by kepynge them 
in a certayne equall heate, they brynge lyfe into them, 
and hatche them 3• The chykens, assone as they be come 
owte of the shell, followe men and women in steade of the 
hennes. • the rougher life'-of the 
husbandman. 
' That is, brml. 
1 The now familiar process of arti­
ficial incubation is alluded to by Bacon 
as something which rested only on 
hearsay. • Eggs, as is reported by 
some, have been hatched in the warmth 
of an oven.' Ntll. 
But Pliny had referred to it long before 
as practised in Egypt. 
54· There is a curious passage relat­
ing to the same subject in Tlu lloiagr 
aNd TraWiik of Sir John Maundeville, 
ed. 1883, P-49, where, speaking of 
Cairo, he says : ' There is a comoun Hows in that Cytee, that is fulle of 
smale Furneys ; and thidre bryngen 
Wommen of the Toun here Eyren of 
Hennes, of Gees and of Dokes, for to 
ben put in to tho Fumeyses. And 
thei that kepen that House coveren 
hem with Hete of Hors Dong, with 
outen Henne, Goos or Doke or any 
other Fowl ; and at the ende of 
3 W ekes or of a Monethe, thei comen 
ayen and taken here chickenes 
and norissche hem and bryngen hem 
forthe.' Even Sir John, however, 
does not cite the additional marvel 
with which More concludes his 
description. 123 
They bryng vp very fewe horses ; nor non, but very 
fearce ones 1 ; and for none other vse or purpose, but 
only to exercyse their youthe in rydynge and feates of 
annes 2• For oxen be put to all the labour of plow­
ynge and drawyng. Whiche they graunte to be not so 
good as horses as• sodeyne brunt, and (as we saye) at 
a dead lifte 3 ; but yet they holde opinion, that oxen 
wyll abyde and suffre much more laboure and payne b 
then horses wyl. And they thinke that they o be not in 
daunger and subiecte :vnto so manye dysseases, and that 
they bee kepte and maynteyned wyth muche !esse coste 
and charge; and fynally that they be good for meate when 
they be past labour. 
They sowe corne onlye for bread. For their drynke 
is other wyne made of grapes, or els of apples or peares•, 
• at a. b payne: and hardnes. boam. 
• The thought may have been sug­
gested by a passage in the RejHdHie, 
Bk.V. by DaviesandVaughan): 
' We must put them [the children] on 
horseback at the eal'licst possible age ; 
and when we have taught them to ride, 
we must take them to see the fighting, 
mounted, not on spirited animals, or 
good chargers, but on horses selected 
for speed and docility.' · • ' Sodeyne brunt' and ' dead lifte ' 
(that is, a lift or pull when there is 
no way or momentum on the load to 
make it easier) represent the single 
word i"'pdus in the Latin. 
• Burnet, more concisely : ' Wine, 
Cyder, or Perry.' 
s A word found in some MSS. of 
Quintilian, lrutil. 3· 10, instead of 
'.lfnTIIIu $'• as an epithet of "ftiO$, 
The ComNtopUM gives it. 
124 [CH. I, 
or els it is deane water; and many tymes methe made 
of honey or liqueresse sodde in water 1, for therof they 
haue great store. And though they knowe certeynlye (for 
they knowe it perfetly in dede). how much victayles the 
cytie with the hole countrey or shiere rounde a boute it 
dothe spende ; yet they sowe much more corne, and bryed 
vp muche more cattell, then serueth for their own vse. And 
the ouerplus they parte" amonge their borderers. What 
soeuer necessary thynges be lackynge in the countrey, all 
suche stuffe they fetche out of the citie ; where without 
anye exchaunge they easelye obteyne it of the magistrates 
of the citie. For euerye moneth manye of them goo into 
the cytie on the hollye daye. When theyr haruest daye 
draweth nere and is at hande, then the Philarches 1, whiche 
• partynge the overplus. Nam iUo singulo 1 quoque 
1 The drink here descnl>ed as made 
by an infusion of honey or liquorice, 
may have been a kind of mead, as 
Robynsoa takes it. Harrison, ia his 
Dumption of ENgiatUJ, Bk. speaks slightingly of 
a bcvera,e known by this name, made 
by the Essez goodwives 'with honi· 
combs and water,' but not to be com­
pared with the true metheglin, with 
which mead is sometimes identified. 
The word appears, however, to have 
been sometimes used in a more general 
sense, as by Milton, when he repre­
sents Eve as preparing to entertain the angel guest :-
' for drink the grape 
She crushes, inoffensive must, and 
Mndlf& 
From many a berry, and from sweet 
kernels press'd 
She tempers dulcet creams.' 
• The change of spelling (see above, 
p. unl is only capricious, and not 
meant to indicate a derivation from 
~PXtH instead of .,.VAa.pxtx. For 
the officers themselves, see below, 
p. 
1 The singular is found in Plautus, 
Ci&l. 
CR. I.] of Utopia. 
be the hed officers and bayliffes of husbandrye, sende 
woorde to the magistrates of the citie, what numbre of 
haruest men is nedefull to bee sente "to them. out of the 
cytie. The 
whiche companye of haruest men, 
beyng there a readye at the daye 
appoynted, almoste in one 
fayre daye dispatcheth 
all the haruest 
woorke. 
ties and namely of Amaurote. 
AS for their Cyties, he that • knoweth one of them 
knoweth them all : they be all so lyke one to 
an other, as ferfurth as the nature of the place permytteth. 
I wyll descrybe therfore to yowe one or other of them, 
for it skylleth not greatly whych ; but which rather then 
Amaurote 1 ? Of them all this is the worthiest and of 
moste dignitie. For the resydwe knowledge it for the 
head cytie, because there is the councell house. Nor to 
me any of them al is better beloued, as wherin I lyued 
fyue hole yeares together. 
• whoso. 
DE VRBIBVS, AC NOMINA 
TIM DE AMAVROTO. 
1 The name is evidently derived 
from dp~~.vp/n, ' dim,' whence dpii.Vpo~t~lf, 
'obscuration,' &c. Baumstark, in bis 
ThtmUU MorN&, 1879, p. 90, oddly 
interprets the word by ' mauerlos,' 
' without walls,' though he adds just 
after that 'die Stadt ist mit ThOrmen, 
Bollwerken und Mauern befestigt.' 
A passage in Mr. John Watney's 
.Aao11nt of tlrt HO$J>iial of St. ThomM 
of .A emu, xf19a, p. I IS, shows that London in More's time, as now, wu 
subject to fogs ; and possibly there 
may have been some thought of this 
in the author's mind, as his Amaurotum 
is evidently drawn with reminiscences 
of London. But most likely the name 
was only meant to convey the same 
impression of vagueness or non-exist­
ence as Utopia itself. 
1 Diftrrt in the sense of' defer to,' is 
-. II.] of Utopia. 127 
The cytie of Amaurote standeth vpon the syde of a low 
hill, in fashion almoste four square. For the bredeth of 
it begynneth a Iitle benethe the toppe of the hyll, and styli 
contyneweth by the space of twoo miles vntyll it cum to 
the ryuer of Anyder. The lenghte of it whiche lyeth by 
the ryuers syde is sumwhat more. 
The ryuere of Anyder 1 rysethe .xxiii. myles aboue 
Amaurote owte of a lytle sprynge. But beynge increasede 
by other small floodes • and broukes that runne into yt, 
and amonge othere .ii. sumwhat bygge ons, before the 
cytye yt ys halfe a myle brode, and farther broder. And 
.lx. b myles beyonde the citye yt falleth into the Ocean 
sea. By al that space that lyethe betwene the sea and 
the cytye, and a good sorte ofo myles also aboue the cytye, 
the water ebbethe and flowethe .vi. Whan the sea flowethe in for the lenghte 
of xxx. myles, yt fyllethe all the Anyder wyth salte water, 
• riuers. The construction probably 
arose from an ellipse of lttmOniH. 
1 Anyder, or rather Anydrus, ~An­
lpor, • waterless,' is a name in keeping 
with the rest. The description of it, 
in some particulars, would accord with 
that of the Thames ; and this resem-blance is pointed out in the marginal 
note which follows. But the measure­
ments would not by any means agree. 
From London Bridge to the Nore is 
about 45 miles, not 6o ; and the length 
of stream above bridge to its soun:e ia 
about 16o miles, not a.., 
128 QI:be seconn15ou [Ca. 
and dryuethe backe the fresshe water of the ryuer. And 
sumwhat furthere yt chaungethe the swetenes of the 
freshe water w~h saltnes. But a letell beyonde that, the 
ryuer waxeth swet, and runneth forby 1 the city fresh and 
pleisaunt. And when the· sea ebbeth, and goyth backe 
agayn, the freshe water followeth yt almoste euen to the 
verye falle in to the sea. 
There goeth a brydge ouer the ryuer made not of pyles 
or of tymber, but of stonewarke 2, with gorgious and 
substanciall archeis at that parte of the cytye that is 
farthest from the sea; to the intent that shyppes maye 
goo • alonge forbie all the syde of the cytie without lette. 
They haue also an other ryuere, whiche in dede is not 
very great. But it runneth gentelly and pleasauntlye 3 • 
• passe. 
1 The GenDan wrlwl', ' past.' 
1 According to Maitland, Hisl. of 
London, 1739, p. 34, the old London 
Bridge, of stone. II, and finished 10 John 
(Iq). 
1 A reminiscence to some extent of 
the Flete river. Our barbarous treat· 
ment of rivers and streams is of very 
old standing, and More's description 
of this tributary of the Anyder sets 
forth what the Flete, with the other water-courses mingling with it, ought 
to have been, but never was. A few 
years before, however, in 1502, scared 
perhaps by the plague of rsoo, which 
drove the court to Calais, the citizens 
had done something. • At this time,' 
says Maitland (ubi sup.), • Fleet Ditch, 
being choked with mud and dirt, was 
render'd intirely useless; wherefore 
it was now eff'ectually cleans'd, and 
the navigation thereof restored to 
Holboum·Bridge, as formerly.' 
Ca. II.] or Utopia. 129 
For it ryseth euen out of the same hyll that the cytie 
standeth vpon, and runneth downe a slope through the 
myddes of the citie into Anyder. And bicause it ryseth 
a lytle without the citie, the Amaurotians haue inclosed 
the head sprynge of it with stronge fences and bulwarkes, 
and so haue ioyned it to the cytie. Thys is done to the 
intente that the water should not be stopped, nor turned 
a waye, or poysoned, if their enemyes should chaunce to 
come vpon them 1• From thence the water is deryued 
and brought • downe in cannellis of brycke dyuers wayes 
into the lower partes of the cytie. Where that cannot be 
done, by reason that the place wyll not suffer it, there 
they gather the rayne water in greate cisternes 2, which 
doth them as good seruice. 
The cytie is compassed aboute wyth a highe and thycke 
walle b, full of turrettes and bulwarkes. A drye dyche, but 
deape and brode and overgrowen with busshes, briers, and 
thornes 3, goeth about .iii. sydes or quarters of the cytie. 
To the fowrth syde the ryuer it selfe serueth for a dytche. ' stone walle. 
I For an example of this ou a large 
scale. 393· We have not 
yet learnt to husband our rain-water. 
K 1 The ditc:b or moat surrounding 
the Tower of London may have been 
in More's mind. This was not, 
however, drained and planted till 
1143-
130 [C•. 
The stretes be appoynted and set forth verye commodious 
and handsome, bothe for carriage and also agaynst the 
wyndes. The houses be of fayre and gorgious buyldyng, 
and in • the streete syde they stonde ioyned together in 
a longe rowe throughe the hole streate without anye parti­
tion or separacion 1• The stretes be twenty fote brode 1• 
On the backe syde of the houses, through the hole lengthe 
of the strete, lye large gardeynes, whyche be closed in b 
rounde about with the backe parte of the stretes. Euery 
house hath two doores; one into the strete, and a posternne 
doore on the backsyde into the gardyne. Thyes doores 
be made with two leaues, neuer locked nor bolted, so 
easye to be opened that they wil followe the least drawing 
of a fynger and shutte agayne by themselfes 0• Euerye 
man that 4 wyll maye goo yn, for there is nothynge 
wythin the howses that ys pryuate, or annye mannes 
owne 3• And euerye .x. yeare they chaunge their howses 
by lotte. • [whycbe ... in] inclosed. that] Whoso. ut hostium in plateam, ita posticum in hortum habeat. 
1 This ia a lax rendering. The sense 
is : ' a long row of buildings, stretching 
the whole length of the streets, makes 
a fine spectacle, as the fronts of the 
houses face you.' 
1 See the Introduction, 1 a, 
p. 1 Community of dwelling· houses was 
inclu<led in the general communism 
of the R,publie. 'No one,' so it was 
provided, ' should have a dwelling or 
storehouse, into which all who please 
maynotenter.'-DaviesandVaughan'• 
translation, p. II.) Of Utopia. J 3 I 
They sett great stoore be theyr gardeins. In them 
they haue vyneyardes \ all manner of frute, herbes, and 
flowres, so pleisaunte, so well furnished, and so fynelye 
kepte, that I neuer sawe thynge more frutefull nor better 
tryrnmed in anny place. Their studye and delygence 
herin cummeth not only of pleasure, but also of a certeyne 
stryffe and contentyon that is betwene strete and strete, 
concernynge the trymmynge, husbanding, and furnyshyng 
of their gardeyns, euery man for hys owne part. And 
verily yow shall not lyghtly fynde in all the citye annye 
thynge that is more commodyous, other for the proffyte of 
the citizins, or for pleasure. And therfore it may seme 
that the first fownder of the city mynded nothynge so 
muche as he dyd • thies gardeyns. 
For they say that kyng Vtopus himself, euen at the first 
begenning, appointed and drew furth the platte fourme of 
• he dyd omlti«J. 
Nam totam bane urbis figuram, iam inde ab initio descriptam ab 
1 The London of More's time Wall the latter end of last century. See 
not without its vineyards, unlikely all Faulkner's Ham_,lth, p. ~ 
that may now seem. Vine Street, • The reference is to Virg. 
SafJron Hill, took its name from the u8 :-
adjacent vineyard of Ely Place. There Forsitan et pingues bortoa quae cura 
Wall auother at Westminster, near colendi 
St. John's Church. 
Drury Lane, is the Vinegartb yard. This part of his subject, which Virgil 
An estensive vineyard, where wine left unfinished, was followed out by 
Wall made and sold, esisted near what Columella, and after him by ReM 
is now Addison Road Station, till Rapin. 
the city into this fasion and figure that it hath nowe ; but 
the gallaunt garnishing, and the bewtiful setting furth of 
it, wherunto he sawe that one mans age wold not suffice, 
that he left to his posterity. For their Cronicles, which 
they kepe written with al deligent circumspection, contein­
ing the history of H .viic.lx. 1 years, euen from the fyrste 
conquest of the IJand, recorde and witnesse that the 
howses in the beginning were verye lowe, and lyke 
homelye cotages, or poore shepparde howses, made at all 
aduentures of euerye rude pyece of woode • that came 
fyrste to handes, wyth mudde walles, and rydged rooffes 
thatched ouer with straw 2• But nowe the houses be 
curiously builded, after a gorgiouse and gallaunt sort, with 
.m. storries one ouer another 8• The owte sydes of the 
• tymber. 
1 That is, 176o. 
1 Even as late as Evelyn's time, thi~ 
description would apply to many parts 
of England Salisbury be describes, 
in 1653, as a city which at small cost 
• might be purg'd and render'd infi­
nitely agreeable, and made one of the 
sweetest townes: but now the common 
buildings are despicable and the streets 
dirty.' Uppingham about the same 
time is remarkable for being ' well 
buiJte of stone, which is a rarity in 
that part of England, where most of 
the rural parishes are but of mud.'­
DUlry, ed. :a33, 1135· 1 According to Martin (Mniianml 
HoUMS atul Cast/" ;,. 9) the addition of even a second 
storey was of comparatively recent 
introduction. ' Late in the fifteenth 
and at the beginning of the sixteenth 
century the houses of the preceding 
period were almost universally altered. 
The hall was divided into two stories. 
Being no longer required for the enter­
tainment of a feodal retinue, a smaller 
height was sufficient; and the altered 
customs of the time rendered addi­
tional bed-room accommodation neces· 
sary. Both purposes were answered 
Cll. II.] or Utopia. 133 
walles be made other of harde Flynte or of plauster, or 
elles of brycke ; and the ynner sydes be well strengthened 
with tymber woorke 1• The rooffes be playne and flatte, 
couered with a certayne kinde of plaster, that is of no 
coste, and yet so tempered that no fyre can hurte or 
peryshe it, and withstandeth the violence of the weether 
better then anye leade. They kepe the wynde out of their 
windowes with glasse 2, for it is there much vsed ; and 
sumwhere also with fyne lynnen clothe dipped in oyle or 
parietum facies, aut silice, aut cementis aut latere coctili constructae, 
in aluum • introrsus congesto rudere. 
by inserting a floor at the level of the 
bed-room. From this to the so-called 
Elizabethan house the transition was 
almost imperceptible.' 
1 It is interesting to compare with 
this what Harrison wrote in IS17· in 
his Ducriptw,. of E~tglallll, Bk. The houses then were still 
mostly of timber. The' certayne kinde 
of plaster' spoken of in the text, is 
called pla!.ter of Paris by Harrison, 
made of' fine alabaster burned, whereof 
in some places we haue great plentie, 
and that verie profitable against the 
rage of fire.' A kind of stucco is 
also described in Erasmus's Dialogue, 
CtntviviNIIf RdigiMNm. 
1 Eden (Sia/6 ofth' Poor, i. 77) 
infers from Harrison's description, in 
the chapter just referred to, that glass 
windows were not introduced into farm-houses much before the reign 
of James I. They are mentioned in 
a lease dated r614. In the houses 
of richer people they were probably 
introduced in the reign of Henry VIII. 
' Of old time,' says Harrison, ' our 
countrie houses, in steed of glasse, 
did vse much lattise, and that made 
either of wicker or fine rifts of oke 
in chekerwise.' It is not clear what 
period Harrison meant by ' of old 
time,' but he mentions a specimen of 
glazing with beryl as still extant at 
Sudley castle. Aa for the use of' panels 
of horne,' he says that they are now 
'quite laid downe in euerie plllce,' 
and lattices less used, glass being so 
plentiful. /Rscriplitm of E~tgla~td, as 
before, pp. :a36, :as. 
• l~ttmllf, in the sense of i1116r· 
dNIIf, is found in Seneca and Quin· 
tilian. 
134 [Cit JI. 
ambre; and that for twoo commodities. For by thys 
meanes more lyght cummeth in, and the wynde is better 
kept out. 135 
S>f tbt ~~~ 
lJ!Strates. 
EUerye thyrty families or fermes chewse them yearlye 
an offycer, whyche in their olde language is called 
the Syphograunte 1, and by a newer name the Phylarche. 
Euerye tenne Syphoagrauntes, with all their 300 • families, 
bee vnder an offycer whyche was ones called the Trani­
bore 2, now the chiefe Phylarche. 
Moreouer, as concerninge the electyon of the Prynce, 
• thirtie. Syphograntis decem eneillDI linpa 
cum suis familiis Traniborus olim, nunc protophyl--t. 
Syphogranti omnes, qui sunt ducenti, iurati lecturos sese quem ------------- -------------
1 A!J the old language of the Uto­
pians is here contrasted with the new, 
in which the names of the magistrates 
are of Greek formation, it might be 
natural to suppose that such words as 
Syphogrgnli and Tnmilxwi were meant 
to be simply unintelligible jargon, like 
the specimen of Utopian speech given 
above (p. But as More tells us 
later on, that the Utopian language, 
though in other respects not unlike 
the Persian, • keepeth dyuers signes 
and tokens of the Greke langage in 
the names of their cityes and of 
theire ,_plnlta" (p. 1114\, we are 
encoW'II(Cd to look for a Greek origin in the words now before us. And it 
must be admitted that while one of 
them has a suspicious resemblance 
to lpan/ldpoc ' bench-eaters,' the first 
part, at any rate, of the other recalls 
~ • a sty.' Can More have been 
thinking of the Benchers and Steward 
(Sty-ward) of his old Inn t It miy 
seem an idle guessing of riddles. But 
it is certain that in his account of the 
public meals of the Utopians there are 
reminiscences of his old life at an Inn 
of Court. See below, p. r6.J, where 
the dining together in ' messes' of four 
is described. 
1 See the preceding note. 
[CII, III. 
all the Syphoagrauntes, which be in number 200, first be 
sworne to chewse him whome they thynke moste mete 
and expedyente. Then by a secrete electyon they name 
prynce 1 one of those .iiii. whomt: the people before named 
vnto them. For owte of the .iiii. quarters of the citie there 
be .iiii. chosen, owte of euerye quartet one, to stande for the 
election, whiche be put vp to the counsell. The princes 
office contineweth all his liffe time, onles he be deposed 
or put downe for suspition of tirannye. They chewse the 
tranibores yearlye, but lightlye they chaunge them not. 
All the other offices be but for one yeare. The Tranibores 
euerye thyrde daye, and sumtymes, if neade be, oftener, 
come into the councell howse with the prynce. Theire 
councell is concernynge the common wealth. Yf there be 
annye controuersyes amonge the commoners, whyche be 
very fewe, they dyspatche and ende them by and hy 2• 
They take euer ii. Siphograntes to them in cowncell, and 
euerye daye a newe coupel. And that ys prouydede that 
no thynge towchynge the common wealthe shalbe con-
maximecensent utilem, suffragiis occultis renunciant principem, unum 
uidelicet ex his quatuor, quos eis populus nominauit. Sypho­
llllm proropnL grantos semper in senatum duos adsciscunt, atque 
omni die diuersos: cautumque ut ne quid ratum sit quod ad rempu-
-----------------------
1 It is evident from the description 
that this ' prince ' (pri11ap&) is the 
chief magistrate of each city only, and 
not king of the whole island. See the 
Introduction, above, p. "'ntun, ' quickly.' This is 
the old sense of 'by and by,' as in 
Luke xxi. 9> ' but the end is not by 
and by,' where the Reviaed Venion 
has 'immediately.' 
CR. 137 
fynned and ratifyed, on les yt haue bene reasonede of and 
debatede iii. dayes in the cowncell, before yt be decreed. 
It is deathe to haue annye consultatyon for the common 
wealthe owte of the cownsell, or the place of the common 
electyon. Thys statute, they saye, was made to thentente, 
that the prynce and Tranibores myghte not easely con­
spire together to oppresse the people by tyrannye, and 
to chaunge the state of the weale publique. Therfore 
matte"\ of greate weyghte and importaunce be brought to 
the electyon house of the syphograuntes, · whyche open 
the matter to their familyes ; and afterwarde, when they 
haue consulted among them selfes, they shewe their 
deuyse to the cowncell. Sumtyme the matter is brought 
before the cowncell of the hole Ilande. 
Furthermore thys custome also the cowncell vseth, to 
dyspute or reason of no matter the same daye that it ys 
fyrste proposed or putt furthe, but to dyfferre it to the 
nexte syttynge of the cownsell. Bycause that no man 
when he hathe rasshelye there spoken that cummeth 
fyrste" to hys tonges ende, shalt then afterwarde rather 
studye for reasons wherewyth to defende and confynne b 
hys fyrste folyshe sentence, than for the commodytye of 
• fynte omillttl. 
the common wealthe ; as one rather wyllynge the harme 
or hynderaunce of the weale publyque, then annye losse 
or dymynutyon of hys owne existymatyon ; and as one 
that wolde not for shame (which is a verye folyshe shame) 
be cowntede • annye thynge ouerseen 1 in the matter at 
the fyrste b; who at the fyrste owghte to haue spoken 
rather wysely then hastely or rashelye. 
• wolde be ashamed .•• to be. b at the firste ouersene in the matter. 
I The Latin means literally • deficient 
in foresight.' Halliwell illustrates this 
use of • overseen ' in the sense of 
• deceived' by a passage from Twmct 
U. E"glislt, 161•: • where if thou be 
owrs«rU in anything, be it never so 
little, I shall utterly perish.' 
~ Erasmus gives the proverb under the heading • In nocte consilium ' 
(Adag. See also 
Herod. Erasmus shows the 
application of the saying to be against 
rashness or precipitancy; so that this 
marginal note should rather be at­
tached to the words 'sed infrequentem 
senatum difreratur.' 
CK. IV.] Of (Jtopfa. 
H U sbandrye is a scyence common to them all in­
generall, both men and women, wherin they be all 
experte and cunnynge. In thys they be all instructe euen 
from their youth ; partely in scholes with traditions and 
preceptes, and partely in the contrey nighe the cytye, 
brought vp 1 as it wer in playing, not on lye beholdynge 
the vse of it, but by occasyon of exercisinge their bodies 
practising it also. 
Besides husbandry, which (as I sayde) is common to 
them all, euery one of them learneth one or other seuerall 
and particuler science, as hys owne proper crafte. That 
is most commonly other clotheworkinge 1 in wolle or flaxe, 
or masonrie, or the smythes crafte, or the carpentes 
DE ARTIFICIIS. 
1 Robynson has confused l'lludi with 
ttlutxJJi. What More says is, that all 
are trained in husbandry from child­
hood ; partly by rules taught in school, 
and partly by beiag tUm 0111, as in play, into the fields adjoining their 
city, which would serve as the best 
kind of object lesson. 
• More probably specifies this in 
the first place, as the manufacture of . 
scyence. For there is none other occupacyon that anye 
numbre to speke of doth vse there. For their garmentes, 
whyche through owte all the Ilande be of one fassion, 
(sauynge that there is a difference betwene the mans 
garmente and the womans, betwene the maried and the 
unmaryed), and this one continueth for euer more un­
chaunged, semely and comely to the eye, no let to the 
mouynge and weldynge of the bodie, also fitte bothe for 
winter and summer: as for thies garmentes (I saye), euery 
familye maketh theire owne 1• But of the other foreseyde 
craftes euerye man learneth one ; and not only the men, 
but also the women. But the women, as the weaker sorte, 
be put to the easere craftes. They• worke wull and flaxe. 
The other b more laborsome sciences be committed to the 
men. For the moste parte euerye man is brought vp m 
• as to, • other omill«l. Sed ex aliis Nt'ftlO daiam 
ezpera anifidl. maxima ex parte quisque in 
woollen cloths was so important an 
industry both in Flanders, where he 
wrote, and in his native country. 
Masonry may have been placed next, 
from the great activity in building 
shown in England during the fifteenth 
century. See Denton's E"'flaml ,;, lh1 
Fift6m/lt CmiNry, 1888, and Professor 
Thorold Rogers' Introduction to Gas­
coigne's Loa', 1881, p. 
1 ' I knewe the time,' says one of the interlocutors in Tlu Com,.ICIII W•l 
of this R'al"' of Engla,d, Is.J9 (ed. 1115), • when men weare con­
tented with cappes, hattes, girdelles, 
and poyntes and all maner of gar· 
mentes made in the townes next 
adioyninge ••• N owe the porest yonge 
man in a countrey can not be con• 
tented either with a lether girdle, or 
lether pointes, gloues, knyues, or 
daggers made aighe home.' 
Ca. IV.) Cf (Jtopfa. 
his fathers craft. For moste commonly they be naturally 
therto bente and inclined. But yf a mans minde stonde 
to anny other, he is by adoption put into a famelye of 
that occupation which he doth most fantasy. Whome not 
only his father, but also the magistrates do diligently looke 
to, that he be putt to a discrete and an honest householder. 
Yea and if anny person, when he hath lerned one crafte, 
be desierous to Ierne also another, he ys lykewyse suffrede 
and permytted. When he bathe learned bothe, he oc­
cupyethe whether he wyll ; onles the cytye haue more 
neade of the one then of the other. 
The chyefe and almoste the onelye offyce of the Sypho­
grauntes ys to see and take hede that no man sytte ydle, 
but that euerye one applye hys owne crafte wyth earneste 
delygence ; and yet for all that not to be weryed from 
earlye in the mornynge to late in the euennynge wyth 
contynuall woorke, lyke laborynge and toolynge beastes. 
For thys ys worse then the myserable and wretced con­
dytyon of bondemen ; whyche neuer the Jesse is almoste 
euery where the lyffe of woorkemen and artyfycers, 
sauynge in vtopia. For they, dyuydinge the daye and the 
nyghte into xxiiii. iust houres, appoynte and assygne only 
patriis artibus educator, nam eo plerique natura feruntur. of those houres to woorke ; iii. • before none, vpon the 
whyche they goo streyghte to dyner; and after dyner, 
when they haue rested ii houres, then they woorke iii.b; 
and vpon that they goo to supper 1• Aboute viii. of the 
clocke in the euenynge ( cowntynge one of the clocke at 
the fyrste houre after none) they go to bedde. houres 
they giue to sleape 1• All the voide time, that is betwene 
the houres of woorke, slepe, and meate, that they be 
• iii. houres. Quicquid inter operis horas ac somni cibique me-
' These Utopian hours of labour 
must have presented a sharp contrast 
to those actually in use in More's 
time. By a statute of u Hen. 22, it was enacted ' that 
every artificer and labourer be at his 
work, between the midst of the month 
of March and the midst of the month 
of September, before five of the cloclr. 
in the morning, and that he have but 
half an hour for his breakfast, and an 
hour and a half for his dinner, of such 
time as he hath season for sleeping, 
to him appointed by this said statute ; 
and at such time as is here appointed 
that he shall not sleep, then he to 
have but one hour for his dinner, 
and half an hour for his noon-meat ; 
and that he depart not from his work, 
between the midst of the r.aid months 
of March and September, till between 
seven and eight of the clock in the 
evening •.• and that, from the midst 
of September to the midst of March, 
every artificer and labourer be at their 
work in the springing of the day, and depart not till night of the same day.' 
See Eden's Slau of tlu Poor, 1797, 
i. 75, and Cunningham's Growtlt of 
E,glisJt lndU&hy, r89o, p. In 
1514 an act was passed, almost iden­
tical in terms with this of r 495 ; but a 
special exemption had to be made in 
it in respect of London, where a higher 
rate of wages prevailed. The sub­
ject, as we may thus see, had been 
very recently brought under More's 
notice. 
• This would make four o'clock the 
hour for rising. Cecil, to whom 
Robynson's translation was dedicated, 
used to rise at that hour when at 
St. John's College, Cambridge; a 
College which bad, ' as 1 have heard 
grave men of credit report, more 
candles lighted in it every winter 
morning before four of the clock, than 
the four of the clock bell gave strokes.' 
T. Nash, quoted in Mayor's edition of 
Ascham's ~. 
For More's own custom in this respect, 
· see above, p. 
• 
CR. IV.] of Utopia. 143 
suffered to bestowe, euerye man as he lyketh beste hym 
selfe : not to thyntente they • shoulde myspende thys tyme 
in ryote, or sloughfullenes; but, beynge then lycensed 
from the laboure of theyr owne occupacyons, to bestowe 
the time wei and thriftely vpon some other good b science, 
as shall please them. For yt ys a solempne custome there, 
to haue lectures daylye earlye in the morning; wher to be 
present they onlye be constreined that be namelye chosen 
and appoynted to learnynge. Howe be yt a greate multy­
tude of euerye sorte of people, bothe men and women, 
goo to heare lectures ; some one and some an other, as 
·· euerye mans nature is inclyned. Yet, this notwithstanding, 
yf any man had rathere bestowe thys tyme vpon hys owne 
occupatyon (as yt chaunceth in manye, whose myndes 
ryse not in the contemplatyon of annye scyence lyberal), 
he is not letted nor prohibited, but is also praysed and 
commended, as profitable to the common wealthe. 
Mter supper they bestowe one houre in playe; in somer 
in their gardeynes, in winter in their commen halles, where 
they dyne and suppe. There they exercise them selfes in 
musyke, or els in honeste and holsome communicacion. 
• that they. 
ae~tate in hortis, hyeme in aulis illis communibus, •n COt"noa. 
Diceplaye, and suche other folish and pernicious games, 
they knowe not 1 ; but they vse .ii. games not muche vnlike 
the chesse. The one is the battell of nombers, wherin 
one numbre stealethe awaye anodier. The other is wherin 
vices fyghte wyth vertues 2, as it were in battell array, or 
a set fyld. In the which game is verye properlye shewed 
bothe the striffe and discorde that vices haue amonge 
themselfes, and agayne theire unitye and concorde againste 
vertues; and also what vices be repugnaunt to what 
vertues; with what powre and strenght they assaile them 
openlye ; by what wieles and. subteltye they assaute them 
secretelye ; with what helpe and aide the vertues resiste, 
and ouercome the puissaunce of the vices ; by what craft 
recreant. ' It was one of the 
necessities of his dignity at court that 
he should have several attendants 
when he went out. When they were 
not engaged in this service he would 
not allow them to remain idle. He 
divided his garden into portions, to 
each of which he assigned one of his 
men as its cultivator. Some learnt to 
sing, othen to play on the organ; but 
he absolutely forbade games of cards 
or dice, even to the youns-gentlemen 
ia his house.'-Bridgett's Lifo, p. 139-1 'Playing at Vertues' is the head· 
ing of one game for maidens in Tilt 
Frmell Garr/m for E11glislt Ladies "'"' 
Gmtinllo_,, r6:u, quoted in Brand's 
Pof'NI•r A111i(/Ni/ies The • batteU of 
oombers,' at which one 'makes booty 
of (prrudaiNr) another,' might answer 
to more than one still-familiar game. 
Playing at · odd and even ' is men· 
tioned by Plato, Lysis, § ao6 E, and 
commentaton on the Rt/iflblie, § -.aa 
(sN/1 fin.), tell us that there was • a 
game called " Cities " played with 
counten.' See D.tvies and VaU&"han, 
as before, p. 1:11 o. JV.] or Otopia. 145 
they frustate their purposes ; and finally by what sleight 
or meanes the one getteth the victory. 
But here, lease 1 you be deceaued, one thinge you muste 
looke more narrowly vpon. For seinge they bestowe but 
vi. houres in woork 2, perchaunce you maye thinke that 
the lacke of some necessarye thinges herof may ensewe. 
But this is nothinge so. For that small time is not only 
inough, but also to muche, for the stoore and abundaunce 
of all thinges that be requisite, other for the necessitie or 
commoditie of liffe. The whiche thing yow also shall per­
ceaue, if you weye and consider with your selfes how 
great a parte of the people in other contreis lyueth ydle. 
First, almoost all women, which be the halfe of the hole 
numbre ; or els, if the women be annye • where occupied, 
their most comonlye in their steade the men be ydle. 
Besydes thys, how great, and howe ydle a companye ys 
theyr of prystes, and relygyous m_en, as they call them 3? 
• some. 
1• • d • • 1" fi Oc10.orum homt· popu 1 pars mers eg~t. 
' This is the estimate of th~ time 
necessary for labour formed by many 
modem socialists. ' If six hours' work 
pw Jintt,' says Marx, 'would suffice to 
keep the labourer and his family, and 
he works ten, who gets the benefit 
of the other four! '-See Woolsey"s 
L Commu1fism aJfd Socialism, p. 
1 Compare what Pole is made to 
say in the Dialogue (p. 156) about 
the ' grete nombur and vnprofytabul ' 
of ' relygyouse personys ; • and the 
passage in Erasmus's IN sam"mda 
Ecrlesiae c011cortlia beginning • Dolen­
dum est tam multos esse monachos.' 
[Cw. 
Put there to all ryche men, speciallye all landed men, 
whyche comonly be called gentylmen, and noble men. 
Take into this numbre also their seruauntes; I meane, 
all that flocke of stout, bragging, russhe bucklers 1• Ioyne 
to them also sturdy and valiaunt beggers 2, clokinge their 
idle leffe 8 vnder the colour of some disease or sickenes. 
And truely yow shall find them much fewer then yow 
thought, by whose labour all these thynges be gotten •, 
that men vse and lyue bye b. Nowe consyder wyth youre 
selfe, of thies fewe that do woorke, how few be occupied 
in necessary woorkes. For where money beareth all ye 
swing, ther many vayne and superfluous occupations must 
nedys be vsed, to serue only for ryotous superfluyte and 
vnhonest pleasure. For the same multytude that now is 
occupied in woorke, if they were deuided into so few 
occupations as the necessary vse of nature requyreth, in 
so greate plentye of thinges, as then of necessity wolde 
• are wrought. b that in mens aft'aires are daylye vsed and frequented. nam haec ipsa multitudo, quae 
nunc operatur, si partiretur in tam paucas artes, quam paucas com­
modus naturae usus postulat, in tanta rerum abundantia, quanta nunc 
1 The • swashbucklers ' of Shak­
spere; or, to borrow Scott's descrip· 
tion of a Highhmd laird, the • dozen 
young lads besides, that have no 
business, but are just boys of the belt, 
to follow the laird, and do his honour's bidding.' Dibdin tries, but wrongly, to 
show that the word means men with 
bucklers ' as flimsy as rushes.' See 
Nares's Glossary, s. 
' See the Introduction, t a 
I That is, J.p, 
CR. IV.] or Utopia. 147 
ensue, doubtles the prices wolde be to lytle for the arti· 
fycers to maynteyne theyre lyuynges. But yf all thyes, 
that be nowe bisiede about vnprofitable occupations, with 
all the hole flocke of them that lyue ydellye and slouth· 
fullye, whyche consume and waste euerye one of them 
more of thies thynges that come by other mens laboure, 
then ii. of the work men themselfes doo ; yf all thyes 
{I saye) were sette to profytable occupatyons, yowe easelye 
perceaue howe lytle tyme wolde be enoughe, yea and to 
muche, to stoore vs wyth all thynges that maye be re· 
quysyte other for necessytye, or for commodytye ; yea, or 
for pleasure, so that the same pleasure be trewe and 
natural}. -
And thys in Vtopia the thynge yt selfe maketh manifeste 
and playne. For there in all the citye, wyth the hole 
contreye or shyere adioynynge to yt, scaselye soo persons 
of all the hole numbre of men and women, that be nother 
to olde nor to weake to woorke, be licensed from • labour. 
Amonge them be the Siphograuntes, which (though they 
be by the Iawes exempte and pryuyleged from labour) yet 
they exempte not themselfes ; to the intent they b maye the 
" and discharged from. b that they. 
rather by their example prouoke other to woorke. The 
same vacation from labour do they also enioye, to whome 
the people, persuaded by the commendation of the priestes 
and secrete election of the Siphograntes, haue geuen 
a perpetual licence from labour to learnyng. But if anny 
one of them proue nott accordinge to the expectation and 
hoope of him conceaued, he is furth with· plucked backe 
to the company of artificers. And contrarye wise, often yt 
chaunceth that a handicraftes man doth so earnestly 
bestowe hys vacaunte and spare houres in learninge, and 
through dilygence so profytte therin, that he is taken 
frome hys handy occupation, and promoted to the company 
of the learned. 
Owt of this ordre of the learned be chosen ambassadours, 
priestes, Trani bores, and finallye the prince him selfe; 
whome they in their olde tonge call Barzanes 1, and by 
a newer name, Adam us s. The residewe of the people 
being nother ydle, nother• occupied about vnprofitable 
• nor yet. 135i, 
that More describes the Utopian lan­
guage as being, with the exception of 
1 divers signs and tokens of the Greek,' 
' in all other points not much unlike 
the Persian tongue.' See below, p ::n4. 
The choice ofBarzanes for the name of 
a chief ruler is in accordance with this. 1 As the river of the Amaurotes was 
Anydrus, 1 without water,' so the king, 
by his later Greek name, was Adl!mus, 
1 without people.' Why Robynson 
turned the name into Adamus. is not 
clear. He or his compositor may per­
haps have been thinking of Adam. 
' Rarmlw is post-classical for raro. IV.] Of Otopia. 149 
exercises, it may be easely iudged in how fewe howres 
how much good woorke by them maye be doone• towardes 
those thinges that I haue spoken of. This commodity 
they haue also aboue other, that in the most part of 
necessary occupations they neade nott so muche worke, 
as other nations doo. For firste of all the buildinge or 
repayring of houses asketh euery where so manye mens 
continuall labour, bicause that the vnthyfty heyre suffreth 
the howses that hys father buylded, in contynewaunce of 
tyme to fall in decay. So that which he myghte haue 
vpholden wyth lytle coste, hys successoure is constreynede 
to buylde yt agayne a newe, to hys greate chardge. Yea, 
manye tymes also the howse that stoode one man in 
muche moneye, anothere ys of so nyce and soo delycate 
a mynde that he settethe nothynge by yt. And yt beynge 
neglected, and therefore shortelye·fallynge into ruyne, he 
buyldethe vppe anothere in an othere place wyth no lesse 
coste and chardge. But emonge the Vtopyans, where all 
thynges be sett in a good ordre, and the common wealthe 
in a good staye, yt very seldome chaunceth, that they chuse 
a new plotte to buylde an house vpon. And they doo 
not only finde spedy and quicke remedies for present 
• doone and dispatched. IV, 
fautes, but also preuente them that be like to fall. And 
by this meanes their houses continewe and laste very 
Ionge with Iitle labour and small reparacions ; in so much 
that that • kind of woorkemen sum times haue almost 
nothinge to doo ; but that they be commaunded to hewe 
timbre at home, and to square and trime vp stones, to the 
intente that if annye woorke chaunce, it may the spedelier 
nse. 
Now 1, Syre, in the ire apparell marke, I praye yow, howe 
few woorkemen they neade. Fyrste of all, whyles they 
be at woorke, they be couered homely with leather or 
skinnes that will last .vii. yeares. When they go furthe 
a brode, they caste vpon them a cloke, whyche hydeth the 
other homelye apparell. Thyes clookes thoroughe owte 
the hole Ilande be all of one coloure, and that is the 
naturall colour of the· wul. They therfor do not only 
spende muche lesse wullen clothe then is spente in othere 
contreys, but also the same standeth them in muche lesse 
coste. But lynen clothe ys made wyth lesse laboure,· and 
a this. 
praesentibus uitiis adhibetur, sed etiam imminentibus occurritur. sed in lineo solus candor, 
• sic A. 
1 Robynson shows, though a little l•m. Burnet's '~ to their Cloaths, 
cumbrously, his knowledge of the force observe how little Work is spent in 
given to a sentence by beginning with them,' though simpler, ignores this. IV.) or Utopia. But in lynen clothe 
onlye whytenese, in wullen onlye clenlynes, ys regardede. 
As for the smalnese or fynesse of the threde, that ys no 
thynge passed for. And thys ys the cause wherfore in 
other places .iiii. clothe gownes of dyuers colours, and 
as manye sylke cootes, be not enoughe for one man. Yea, 
and yf he be of the delycate and nyse sorte, x. be to fewe ; 
where as there one gannente wyll serue a man mooste 
commenlye .ii. yeares. For whie shoulde he desyre moo? 
seing if he had them, he should not be the better hapt 1 or 
couered from colde, nother in his apparell any whyt the 
cumlyer. 
Wherefore, seynge they be all exercysed in profytable 
occupatyons, and that fewe artyfycers in the same craftes 
be suffycyente, thys ys the cause that, plentye of all 
thynges beynge emonge them, they doo sumtymes bring 
furthe an innumerable companye of people to amende the 
hyghe wayes, yf annye be broken. Manye times also, 
when they haue no such woorke to be occupied about, an 
open proclamation is made that they shall bestowe fewer 
houres in woorke. See the Glossary. IV, 
their citizens againste theire willes in vnneadfull laboures. 
For whie? in the institution of that weale publique this 
ende is onlye and chiefely pretended and mynded, that 
what time maye possibly be spared from the necessary 
occupations and affayres of the commen wealthe, all that 
the cytizeins sholde withdrawe from the bodely seruice to 
the free liberty of the mind and gamisshing of the same. 
· For herin they suppose the felicity of this liffe to consist. 
CK. 153 
~ f t b e t r lp::: 
uing and mutuall conuersation together. 
BUt now will I declare how the c.itizens vse themselfes 
one towardes another ; what familiar occupieng and 
enterteynement there is emong the people ; and what 
fasion they vse in distributinge euery thynge. First, the 
city consisteth of families : the families most commonlie 
be made of kinredes. For the women, when they be 
maryed at a lawfull age, they goo into their husbandes 
houses. But the male chyldren, with al the hole male 
ofspring, continewe still in their owne familie, and be 
gouerned of the eldest and auncientest father, onles he 
dote for age ; for then the next to hym in age is put • in 
his rowme. 
But to thintent the prescript numbre of the citezens 
shoulde nether decrease, nor aboue measure increase, it 
is ordeined that no famylie, whiche in euerye citie be vi. 
DE COMMERCIIS MVTVIS. V, 
thousand in the hole, besydes them of the contrey, shall at 
ones haue fewer chyldren of the age of xiiii. yeares or there 
aboute 1 then x., or mo then xvi. ; for of chyldren vnder 
thys age no numbre can be• appointed. This measure or 
numbre is easely obserued and kept, by puttinge them that 
in fuller families be aboue the numbre into families of 
smaller increase. But if chaunce be that in the hole citie 
the stoore encrease aboue the iust numbre, therewith they 
fyll vp the lacke of other cityes. But if so be that the 
multitude throughout the hole Ilande passe and excede 
the dew numbre, then they chewse out of euery citie 
certeyn cytezens, and buylde vp a towne vnder their owne 
lawes in the nexte Iande 2 where the inhabitauntes haue 
• be prescribed or. 
1 This is a diffuse explanation of 
jluwiYS, by which More no doubt 
simply meant ' adults,' as he meant 
' children ' by impuiNrrs. in toltlinmt' proximo, • on the 
nearest part of the mainland,' Utopia 
being an island. The possibility of 
such an outlet for surplus population 
was necessary for More's purpose, and 
the assumption made must not be too 
severely scrutinized. In fact, with 
the sparse population of England in 
his day (not exceeding af millions in 
England and Wales together) there must have been no Jack of ' waste 
lands' within easy reach of many of 
its cities. See Professor J. Thorold 
Rogen' bult~slritll tuUI QJ,.,,,n;ial 
History of E~tgklruJ, Ill9a, p. 
• This was the word used by More 
towards the end of the lint chapter, 
to express the district assigned to each 
city. It is found in Pliny in the sense 
of a judge's district. Then, like the 
low Latin 'districtus,' it came to sig­
nify the diocese of a bishop ; or, as 
here, an adjacent territory in general. 
CH. 155 
muche waste and vnoccupied grounde, receauinge also of 
the inhabitauntes a to them, if they wil ioyne and dwel 
with them. They, thus ioyning and dwelling together, 
do easelye agre in one fassion of liuing, and that to the 
great wealth of both the peoples. For they so brynge 
the matter about by their Iawes, that the grounde which 
before was nether good nor profitable for the one nor for 
the other, is nowe sufficiente and frutefull enough for them 
both. But if the inhabitauntes of that Iande wyll not 
dwell with them, to be ordered by their Iawes, then they 
dryue them out of those boundes, which they haue limited 1 
and apointed out for themselues. And if they resiste and 
rebell, then they make warre agaynst them. For they 
counte this the moste iust cause of warre 2, when any 
people holdeth a piece of grounde voyde and vacaunt to 
no good nor profitable vse, kepyng other from the vse and 
possession of it, whiche notwithstandyng by the lawe of 
nature ought thereof to be nowryshed and relieued. If 
any chaunce do so muche dimynishe the numbre of anye 
• the same countrey people. 
J Rather, • which they now mark 
out for themselves ';-not that they 
bad done so before. John, in his note on the 
passage, justifies the doctrine here laid down by an appeal to Grotius, 
IN }Nn, Lib. 
§ xvii t) 
• The word is unclassical as an 
adjective. 
_j 
QI:be seconb 15oke (CR.\', 
of their cyties, that it cannot be fylled vp agayne wythout 
the diminishynge of the iust numbre of the other cyties 
(whiche they say chaunced but twyse syns the begynnynge 
of the Iande, through a greate pestilente plage 1 ), then they 
make • vp the numbre with cytezens fetched out of their 
owne forreyne townes ; for they hadde rather suffer theyr 
forreyn townes to decaye and peryshe, then annye cytie 
of their owne Ilande to be dimynyshed. 
But nowe agayne to the conuersation of the cytezens 
amonge themselfes. The eldeste (as I sayde) rueleth the 
familie. · The wyfes bee ministers to theyr husbandes, the 
chyldren to theyr parentes, and, to bee shorte, the yonger 
to theyr elders. Euerye cytie is diuided into foure 2 equall 
partes b. In the myddes of euery quarter there is a market 
place of all maner of thynges. Thether the workes of 
euery familie be brought in to certeyne houses. Eo in 88 
certas domos opera cuiusque familiae conuehuntur, atque in horrea 
1 The subject might be fresh in 
More's thoughts from the visitation in 
15o8, when, as a contemporary writer 
relates : • passim undique occidunt vi· 
catim in urbe hac non pauci • Prayers 
were publicly oft'ered in St. Paul's, in 
August of that year, ' ob bane sudoris 
plagam.' In 1517 it broke out again still 
more dreadfully. Bishop Langland, 
preaching soon after, speaks of the • terribilem sudandi novitatem,' through 
which all was • Ionge Iateque depopu­
Iata.' -See the Swmones loaHIIis Ltmg­
lalldl; 1518, ft'. 15, 64; Gairdner's 
Historid ••• a Ihmardo A11drN Tholo­
Mie toMcripta, r8s8, pp. 
1 These are the four wards men· 
tioned above, p. V.] of Otopta. 157 
euery kynde of thynge is layde vp seuerall in barnes or 
store houses. From hence the father of euery famelie or 
euery housholder fetcheth whatsoeuer he and hys haue 
neade of, and carieth it awaye with hym without money, 
without exchaunge, without annye gage or• pledge. For 
whye should anye thynge be denyed vnto hym; seyng 
there is abundaunce of all thynges, and that it is not to be 
feared lest anye man wyll aske more then he neadeth ? 
For whie should it be thoughte that man would aske more 
then enough, which is sewer neuer to lacke ? Certeynly, 
in all kyndes of lyuynge creatures, other fere 1 of lacke 
doth cause couetousnes and rauyne, or in man only pryde ; 
whiche counteth it a gloryouse thynge to passe and excell 
other in the superfluous and vayne ostentacion of thynges. 
The whyche kynde of vice amonge the Vtopians can haue 
no place. 
Next to the market places that I spake of stonde meate 
markettes 2, whether be brought not on lye all sortes of 
• g11ge, pawne, or. John points out (quoting 
Hobbes, D' Ciw, i. i.), while fear 
might be a motive for the formation of 
human societie~, it is not the appre• 
hension. but the actual consciousness, 
of want that rouses the savage instincts 
of animals. I ' Provision markets," as we should 
now call them ; ' meat ' being used in 
its old sense. 3· 20, 
in the sense of requital, ' Par pari 
datum hostimentum est ; opera pro 
pecunia.' 
[Ca. V, 
herbes, and the fruites of trees with breade, but also fishe, 
and all maner of iiii. footed beastes, and wilde foule that be 
mans meate. But first the fylthynes and ordure therof is 
clene washed awaye in the runnynge ryuer, without the 
cytie t, in places appoynted, mete for the same purpose. 
From thence the beastes brought • in kylled, and deane 
wasshed by the handes of their bondemen. For they 
permytte not their frie citezens to accustome there selfes 
to the killing of beastes ; through the vse whereof they 
thinke that b clemencie, the genteleste affection of our 
nature, doth o by litle and litle decayed and peryshe. 
N other they suffer anye thynge that is fylthye, lothesome, 
or vnclenlye, to be brought into the cytie; least the ayre, 
by the stenche therof infected and corrupte, shoulde cause 
pestilente diseases 1• 
• be broughL b that omitl«l. 
1 See the note before, p. In 
this respect More had not risen, nor 
in fact have we, above the ideas of his 
age, which allowed rivers to be made 
receptacles for garbage. 
• We have of late years made some 
progress in this direction. But we 
leave in full swing another abuse, as re­
gards the pollution of the atmosphere, 
which could hardly have occurred to the mind of More The mill chimneys, 
in many manufacturing towns, still 
discharge their volumes of smoke into 
the air, in defiance of all restraint. 
That so many tons of fuel should be 
daily wasted, appears to be a matter 
of no more concern than the blightinr 
of the herbage for miles around, or 
the injuey done to the health of 
thousands. 159 
Moreouer euerye strete hath certeyne great large halles 
sett in equal distaunce one from an other, euerye one 
knowne by a seuerall naQte. In thies halles dwell the 
Syphograuntes 1• And to euery one of the same halles 
be apoynted xxx. families, of• ether side xv. The stewardes 
of euery halle at a certayn houre come in to the meate 
markettes, where they receyue meate accordinge to the 
numbre of their halles 1• 
But first and chieflie of all, respect is had to the sycke 
that be cured 3 in the hospitalles. For in the circuite of 
the citie, a litle without the walles, they haue .iiii. hospitalles ; 
so bygge, so wyde, so ample, and so lardge •, that they 
may seme .iiii. Iitle townes ; which were deuised of that 
bygnes, partely to thintent the sycke, be they neuer so 
many in numbre, shuld not lye to thronge or strayte, and 
therfore uneasely and incomodiously; and partely that 
they which were taken and holden with contagious 
diseases, suche as be wonte by infection to crepe from one 
to an other, myght be laid a part farre from the company 
• on. 
Sed prima ratio aegrotorum habetur; qui in publicis hospitiis 
curantur. 135-
1 That is, to the number of persons 
in their respective halls. 
1 In the old sense of • cured,' that is, being attended to, or taken care 
of. 
• Note the four equivalents for 
CtljHKic. 
160 (CH. 
of the residue 1• Thies hospitalles be so well apointed, and 
with al thynges necessary to health so furnished ; and 
more ou~r so diligent attendaunce through the continual 
presence of cunnyng phisitians is geuen, that though no 
man be sent thither against his will, yet notwithstandinge 
there is no sicke persone in all the citie, that had not 
rather lye there then at home in his owne house 2• When 
the stewarde of the sicke hath receiued suche meates as 
the phisitians haue prescribed, then the beste is equally 
deuided among the halles, according to the company of 
euery o11e, sauing that there is had a respect to the prince. 
the byshop 8, the tranibours, and to ambassadours, and all 
straungers, if there be any, whiche be verye fewe and 
longius ab • aliorum coetu semoueri possint. 
1 More's enlightened discernment in 
all this will be readily acknowledged. 
But the fact that so much provision 
for the sick should be contemplated 
by him in his happy island, shows how 
heavily Death and Disease had laid 
their hands on society in his age. Wright's History of Can"rntun 
and Grot'sfJN' in Arl, 1865, p. 
• In reading this, we should re­
member what scanty provision for the 
sick there was in London when More 
wrote. Bartholomew's, indeed, 
existed; but St. Thomas's, founded as II traniborum, A. 
an almonry, was not opened for its 
present purpose till 1552. Guy's and 
St. George's are both of last century. 
The foundation of the Royal College 
of Physicians, with its attendant im· 
provements in medical science, was in 
1518, two years after the appearance 
of Utopia. Possibly Linacre was stimu­
lated in his good work by the picture 
here drawn. 
• He is mentioned in the last chapter 
as' the chiefe heade of them all '-that 
is, of the priests; but comparatively 
little is said about him. V.) or Otopfa. But they also, when they be there, haue cer· 
teyne .. houses a pointed and prepared for them. 
To thies halles at the set houres of dinner and supper 
cummith all the hole Siphograuntie or warde, warned by 
the noyse of a brasen trumpet ; except such as be sicke in 
the hospitalles or els in their owne houses. Howe be it, 
no man is prohibited or forbid, after the halles be serued, 
to fetch home meate out of the market to his own house. 
For they knowe that no man wyl doo it without a cause 
resonable. For thoughe no man be prohibited to dyne 
at home, yet no man doth it willynglye, because it is 
counted a pointe of small honestie. And also it were 
a follye to take the payne to dresse a badde dyner at 
home, when they maye'be welcome to good and fyne fare 
so nyghe hande at the hall. In this hal all vyle seruice, 
all slauerie and drudgerye, with all laboursome toyle and b 
busines, is done by bondemen. But the women of euery 
famelie by course haue the office and charge of cokerye, 
for sethinge and dressynge the meate, and orderyng al 
thinges therto belonging. They syt at iii. "and base. habetar 
ratio, ne qaid &at 
a coactil. Tribus 
)( 
[Ca. V, 
accordyng to the numbre of their company. The men syt 
vpon the benche next the wall, and the women agaynst 
them on the other syde of the table; that, if anye sodeyne 
euell should chaunce to them, as many tymes happeneth 
to women with chylde, they maye ryse wythout trouble 
or disturbaunce of anye body, and go thence into the 
nurcerie. 
The nourceis sitte seuerall alone with their yonge sucke· 
linges in a certayne parloure apointed and deputed to the 
same purpose, neuer without fire and deane water, nor 
yet without cradels ; that when they wyll they maye laye 
downe the yong infauntes, and at their pleasure take them 
out of their swathynge clothes and holde them to the 
fyere, and refreshe them with playe. Euery mother is 
nource to her owne chylde t, onles other death or syckenes 
be the let. When that chaunceth, the wyues of the Sipho· 
grauntes quyckelye prouyde a nource. And that is not 
harde to be done. For they that can doo it do • proffer 
themselfes to no seruice so gladlye as to that. 
1 On the neglect of this first of 
parental duties, Erasmus baa some 
bitter remarks in his dialogue Pun-pws. 
that there thys kynde of pitie is muche praysed ; and the 
chylde that is nouryshed euer after taketh hys nource for 
his owne naturall mother. Also amonge the nourceis syt 
all the chyldren that be vnder the age of v. yeares. All 
the other children of both kyndes, aswell boyes as gyrles, 
that be vnder the age of marryage, doo other serue at the 
tables t, or els if they be to yonge therto, yet they stande 
by with meruelous silence 2• That whiche is giuen to thern 
from the table they eate, and other seuerall dynner tyme 
they haue none. The Siphograunt and his wife sitteth in 
the middes of the highe table, forasmuche as that is 
counted the honerablest place, and because from thence al 
the hole companye is in their syght. For that table 
standeth ouer wharte 8 the ouer en de of the halle. 
1 In a little tract, ~ disciplina II 
t'n:slihdiotu Puuorum, of which the 
fourth edition was published in Paris 
in 1531, the well-taught boy has a 
chapter of instructions ~ ptWNs ;, 
milti#wio -· He is first taught 
how and in what order to 'lay the 
table.' Then, when all is ready, the 
direction is given him : ' Erectus et 
compositis pedibus sta, sollicite ani­
maduertens ne desit quid. 
apponendum, aut tollendum, ciuiliter 
id feceris.' As to the silence men­
tioned just after in the text, the rule 
is : • Astans non turbabis, uel inter­
turbabis aliorum sennonem ; sed inter­
rogatus breuiter respondeto' (p. 
• In Holbein's drawing ofthe family 
of Sir Thomas More, only two out of 
the ten figures are seated-Sir Thomas 
and his aged father. The rest are all 
either standing or lmeeling. 
1 That is, overthwart, or acrc.s. 
112 
(CR. V, 
them be ioyned ii. of the anctientest and eldest. For at 
euery table they syt iiii. at a meesse 1• But if there be 
a church standing in that Siphograuntie, or warde, then 
the priest and his wyfe sitteth with the Siphograunte, as 
chiefe in the company. On both sydes ofthem sytte yonge 
~en, and nexte vnto them agayne olde men. An thus 
throughe out all the house 2 equall of age be sette together, 
and yet be myxte with • vnequall ages. Thys they saye 
was ordeyned, to the intent that the sage grauitie and 
reuerence of the elders should kepe the yongers from 
wanton licence of wordes and behauiour; for as muche as 
nothyng can be so secretly spoken or done at the table, 
but either they that syt on the one syde or on the other 
must nedes perceiue it. The disshes be not set downe in 
ordre from the first place, but all the old men (whoes 
places be marked with som speciall token to be knowen) 
be first serued of there meate, and then the residue equally. 
The old men deuide their dainties 3, as they think best, to 
• and matched with. At si templum in ea Syphograntia situm est, 
Sa<:erd .. cohibeat. At senes lautitias suas (quarum non tanta erat c;opia ut 
1 See the Introduction, pp. 
• That is, the hall. We still speak 
of • a full house ' at a theatre, • houses 
of parliament,' &c. In some parts of 
England, the one large living-room in a farmhouse, answering to the hall in 
a mansion, is called the • house-place' 
or • house.' 
1 The clause within parentheses in 
the Latin is left out by the translator, 
ca. 
the yonger that sit of both sides them •. Thus the elders 
be not defrauded of their dewe honoure, and neuerthelesse 
equall commoditie commeth to euery one. 
They begin euerye dynner and supper of reading sum· 
thing that perteineth to good maners and vertue 1• But it 
is short, becawse no man shalbe greued therwith. Here 
of thelders take occasion of honest communication, but 
nother sad nor vnpleasaunt 1• Howbeit, they do not spend 
all the hole dyner time themselfes with long and tedious 
talkes ; but they gladly here also the yong men ; yea and 
do b purposly prouoke them to talke, to thentent that they 
maye haue a profe of euery mans wit and towardnes or 
disposition to vertue, which commonly in ye liberte of 
• yonger on eche syde of them. ld hodie 11;, 
Ab hac seniores hone!tos sermones, sed neque tristes monachi 
ac a infacetos, ingerunt. 
Burnet supplies it : • if there is not 
such an Abundance of them that the 
whole Company may be served alike.' 
1 A common custom at the time, 
though the marginal note seems to 
point to its being on the decline. 
When Ralph Collingwood, Dean of 
Lichfield, who died in ISIS, was 
making further provision for the Col­
lege of St. Thomas in Stratford-on­
Avon, he ordained that his choristers 
' at dinner and supper time should 
constantly be in the College, to wait 
at the Table, and to read the Bible, or b om. 
some other authentic Book.'-Lans­
downe MS. More 
prsctised the same custom at his owh 
table. 
t Compare what Erasmus says of 
Colet, when similarly engaged : ' He 
would so season the discourse that, 
though both serious and religious, it 
had nothing tedious or affected about 
it.: Ldkr to Jushu Jo,.as ( ed. V, 
feasting doth shew and vtter it selfe. Theire dyners be 
verye short ; but there suppers be sumwhat longer ; be­
cause that after dynner followeth laboure; after supper 
sleape and naturall reste; whiche they thynke to be of no a 
more strengthe and efficacy to holsome and healthfull 
digestion. No supper is passed without musicke 1 ; nor 
their bankettes lacke no conceytes nor ionckettes. They 
burne swete gummes and speces forb perfumes and plea­
saunt smelles, and sprincle about swete oyntmentes and 
waters ; yea they leaue nothyng vndone that maketh for 
the cheryng of the company. For they be muche enclyned 
to this opinion : to thinke no kynde of pleasure forbidden, 
wherof cummeth no harme. 
Thus therfore and after this sorte they lyue togethers in 
the citie ; but in the contrey they that dwell alone, farre 
from anye neyghbours, do dyne and suppe at home in 
their own houses. For no famelie there lacketh anye 
kynde of victualles, as from whome cummeth all that the 
cytezens eate and lyue bye. "or. 
1 On More's fondness for music, see 
the Introduction, p. xxiv, and the note 
below,p.~S· A viol is seen hanging up -----------
in Holbein's drawing of his household. 
• See Ray : English Prowm, q68, 
p. 
fi .f!)f tbtit 
iourneyenge or trauaylynge a brode, 
with dyuers other matters cun­
nyngly reasoned and witti-
lie discussed 1• 
B l1 t if any be desierous to vysite other their fryndes 
that dwel• in an other Cytie, or to see the place it 
selfe, they easelye obteyne lycence of their Siphograuntes 
and Tranibores, oneles there bee some profitable let 2• 
No man goeth out alone; but a companye is sente furth to 
gether with their princes letters, whiche do testifie that 
they haue licence to go that iorney, and prescribeth also 
the day of their retourne 1• They haue a wageyn geuen 
them, with a common bondman, whiche driueth the oxen 
• dwelling. 
1 Robynson properly expands the 
title of this chapter, which treats of 
many subjects besides the Pft'r/Pinatio 
of the Utopians. 
1 That is, as Burnet words it, • when 
there is no particular occasion for him 
l them l at Home.' 
• This may have been suggested by 
what Plutarch tells us of an ordinance of Lycurgus for the Spartans: ' For 
the same reason he would not permit 
all that desired it to go abroad and see 
other countries, lest they should con­
tract foreign manners, [or) gain traces 
of a life of little discipline, and of a 
different form of govemment.'-Liws, 
tr. by the Langhomes, ed. 
-
J68 [Ca. 
and taketh charge of them. But onles they haue women 
in their company, they sende home the wageyn againe, as 
an impediment and a let. And though they canye nothyng 
furth wit them, yet in all their iomey they lacke nothing. 
For whersoeuer they come they be at home. If they tary 
in a place longer then one day, than there euery one of 
them falleth to his own occupation, and be very gentilly 
enterteined of the workmen and companies of the same 
craftes. If any man of his owne head and without leaue 
walke out of his precinct and boundes, taken without 
the princes lettres, he is brought again for a fugitive or 
a runaway with great shame and rebuke, and is shapely • 
punished. If he be taken in that faulte agayne, he is 
punished with bondage. 
If anye be desierous to walke a brode into the fieldes, 
or into the contrey that belongeth to the same citie that he 
dwelleth in, obteynyng the good will of his father, and the 
consent of his wife 1, he is not prohibited. But into what 
part of the contrey soeuer he cummeth, he hath no meat 
geuin him untill he haue wrought out his forenones taske, 
or els dispatched so muche worke as there is wonte to be 
• sharpely. Sed in quod­
cunque rus peruenerit, nullus ante cibus datur, quam ante meridia­
num operis pensum (aut quantam ante coenam ibi laborari solet) 
1 'The complaisance of the Utopians respect imitate their uamplc I'­
towards their wives is truly exemplary. 
I fear the Europeans do not in every 
Ca. 
wrought befor supper. Obseruing this lawe and con­
dition, he may go whether he well within the boundes of 
his owne citie. For he shalbe no les profitable to the 
citie, then if he were within it. 
Now yow see howe Iitle libertie they haue to loyter; 
how they can haue no cloke or pretence to ydelnes. 
There be nether wyn tauernes, nor ale houses, nor stewes, 
nor any occasion of uice or wickednes, no lurking corners, 
no places of wicked councelles or vnlawfull assembles ; 
but they be in the present sight, and vnder the iyes of 
euery man ; so that of necessitie they must other applie 
their accustomed labours, or else recreate themselues with 
honest and laudable pastymes. 
This fassion being • vsed among the people, they must 
of necessitie haue b store and plentie of all thinges. And 
seing they be al therof parteners equally, therfore cane 
no man there be poore or nedye. In the councel of 
Amaurot (whether, as I sayde 1, euery citie sendeth .m. 
• and trade of life being. 
1> it cannot be chosen but that they must haue. 
1 See above, p. II9-
• So used in Plautns, Baa/rid. 4 7 : ' ut solet in istis fieri concilia­
bulis.' 
1 In the first edition, instead of 
.Am~~urotico, the word is here lllmli-I'YJII01 suggesting the derivation from 
..u~tliri ' to lie.' As More's other 
imaginary names are mostly from the 
Greek. and as lllmtimlfO might sound 
rather too blunt, we can see reasons 
why he should have made the altera-
(Cn. 
men a pece yearly}, assone as it is perfectly knowen of 
what thynges there is in euery place plentie, and agayne 
what thynges be skant in anye place ; incontinent the lacke 
of the one is performed 1 and fylled vp with the aboundaunce 
of the other. And this they doo frelye without any 
benifite, takyng nothing agayn of them to whom the 
thinges is geuen ; but those cyties that haue geuen of 
their store to anye other cytie that lacketh, reqilyrynge 
nothynge agayne of the same cytie, do take suche thinges 
as they lacke of an other cytie, to whome • they gaue 
nothynge. So the hole llande is as it were one famelie 
or housholde. 
But when they haue made sufficiente prouision of 
stoore for them selfes (whiche they thinke not doone · 
untyll they haue prouyded for two yeares followynge, 
bicause of the vncertentie of the nexte yeares proffe 2), 
then of those thynges wherof they haue abundaunce 
they carry furthe into other contreis greate plenty; as 
grayne, honnye, wulle, flaxe, woode, madder, purple die b 
• to the which. But why, when he had the 
council of Amaurote (already so named) 
in his mind, he should c;ver have 
coined this other word. is a little 
curious. Was the familiar sound of 
' in Parliamm/o ' in his thoughts, and 
did be wish to convey that the council at St. Stephen ·s was not so much the 
• national palaver,' as Carlyle called it, 
as somethi.ug worse 1 
1 That is, completed. See the 
Glossary. 
• Frum being used to render the 
Latin nu~~l11m, this appears intended 
CR. 
felles 1, waxe, tallowe, lether, and liuyng beastes. And the 
seuenth part of all thies thynges they gyue franckely 
and frelye to the poore of that contrey. The resydewe 
they sell at a reasonable and meane price. By this trade 
of traffique or marchandise, they bring into their own 
contrey not only great plentie of golde and siluer, but 
also all suche thynges as they lacke at home, whych is 
almoste nothynge but Iron 2• And by reason they haue 
Ionge vsed thys trade, nowe they haue more abundaunce 
of thies thynges then any man wyll beleue. N owe, 
therfore, they care not whether they sell for reddye 
moneye, or els vpon truste to be paide at a daye, and 
to haue the most part in debtes. But in so doyng 3 they 
neuer followe the credence of pryuat men, but the 
assureaunce or warrauntise of the hole citye, by instru· 
mentes and writinges made in that behalfe accordinglye. Itaque nunc 
parum pensi habent, praesente ne pecunia an in diem uendant, mol­
toque maximam partem habeant in nominibus; in quibus tamen 
faciendis non priuatorum unquam sed confectis ex more instrumentis 
to mean • what the next year might 
prow to be.' But see the Glossary. 
1 Robynson's first reading is here 
more correct than his second. It 
should be 1 purple die, felles,' &c.; the 
items being separate. Burnet leaves 
the words out. 
• There is nothing to show that 
More is here thinking of the imports 
and exports of his own country. But, 
as a matter of fact, steel and iron were then among its imports. In The 
Commmt W~t~l ofth' R«~lm of England, 
before quoted, among the articles which 
the king must import from abroad, are 
'yron, steile, bandgonns, gonpowder,' 
and many other things. 34· 
1 Robynson has not understood the 
idiom rrominafaaw, 'to lend.' Comp. 
When the daye of paymente is come and expyred, the 
cytye 1 gathereth vp the debte of the priuate dettours, 
and putteth it into the common boxe, and so long hath 
the vse and proffytte of it, vntyll the vtopians their 
creditours demaunde it. The mooste parte of it they 
neuer aske. For that thynge whyche is to them no 
proffyte, to take it from other to whom it is proffytable, 
they thinke it no righte nor conscience. But yf the 
case so stande, that they must lende parte of that 
money to an other people, then they requyre theyre 
debte; or when they haue warre. For the whyche 
purpose onelye they keap at home al the treasure 
which they haue, to be holpen and socoured by yt other 
in extreame ieopardyes, or in suddeyne daungers ; but 
especyallye and chieflye to hiere therwyth, and that for 
vnreasonable greate wayges, straunge soldyours. For 
they hadde rather put straungers in ieopardye then theyre 
owne contreye men ; knowinge that for moneye enoughe 
theire enemyes themselfes manye tymes may be bowghte 
and.. solde, or els throughe treason be sette togethers 
• or. it should 
men:lumdise has been exported. rather have been U..t. 173 
by the eares emonge themselfes. For thys cause they 
kype an inestymable treasure; but yet not as a treasure; 
but so they haue yt and vse yt as in good faythe I am 
ashamede to shewe, fearynge that my woordes shal not 
be beleued 1• And thys I haue more cause to feare, for 
that I knowe howe dyffucultlye and hardelye I meselfe 
wolde haue beleued an othere man tellynge the same, 
yf I hadde not presentlye seene yt wyth myne owne 
iyes. For yt muste nedes be, that howe farre a thing 
is dissonaunt and disagreinge from the guyse and trade 2 
of the hearers, so farre shall yt be owte of theyr beleffe. 
Howe be yt, a wyse and indyfferente estymer of thynges 
wyll not greatly marueil perchaunce, seing al theyre other 
Iawes and customes doo so muche dyfferre from owres, 
yf the vse also of golde and syluer amonge them be 
applyed 9 rather to theyr owne fassyons then to owers. 
I meane, in that they occupye' not moneye themselfes, 
but kepe yt for that chaunce ; whyche as yt maye happen, 
so yt maye be that yt shall neuer come to passe. 
' The art shown in this prelude 
is pointed out in the marginal note. 
What More is thus prefacing is the 
conduct of the Utopians in despising 
gold and silver in comparison with 
iron. but keeping a great store of those 
metals, to buy the services of such as held them precious. 
1 We should now say 'from the 
manners and customs ; ' Lat. 
See the Glossary. 
I That is, adapted. 
• Compare the ' new ropes never 
occupied' (used) of Judges xvi. 
In the meane tyme golde and syluer, whereof moneye 
ys made, they doo soo vse, as none of them dothe more 
estyme yt, then the verye nature of the-thynge deseruethe. 
And then who. dothe-not playnlye see howe farre yt ys 
vnder Iron ? as wythoute the whyche men canne no 
better lyue then withowte fyere and water; whereas to 
golde and syluer nature bathe geuen no vse that we may 
not wei lacke, yf that the folly of men hadde not sette 
it in hygher estymacyon for the rarenes sake. But, of 
the contrary parte, nature, as a moste tender and louynge 
mother, hath placed the beste and moste necessarye 
thynges open a brode; as the ayere, the water, and the 
earth it selfe ; and hath remoued and hydde farthest from · 
vs vayne and vnprofytable thynges 1• Therfore yf thies 
metalles among them shoulde be fast locked vp in some 
tower, it myghte be suspected that the prynce and the 
cowncell (as the people is euer foolyshelye ymagininge) 
intended by some subtyltye to deceaue the commons, and 
to take some proffette of it to themselfes. fecisset tksulft ;,. 
1 Cicero has a similar thought, 1h 
Nat. 175 
if they should make therof plat 1 and such other finely 
and cunningly wrought stuffe ; yf at anye tyme they 
shoulde haue occasyon to breake it, and melte it agayne, 
and • therwyth to paye their souldiours wages 2; they see 
and perceiue very well that men wolde be lothe to parte 
from those thynges that they ons begonne to haue pleasure 
and delyte in. 
To remedye all thys, they haue fownde owt a meanes, 
which, as it is agreable to al their other Iawes and customes, 
so it is from ours, where golde is so muche set by and so 
delygently kepte, very farre discrepant and repugnaunt; 
and therfore vncredible, but only to them that be wise 3• 
For where as they eate and drincke in earthen and glasse 
vesselles, which in dede be curiously and properlie made, 
and yet be of very small value; of gold and siluer they 
make commonlye chamber pottes, and other like b vesselles 
that serue for moste vile vses, not only in their common 
halles, but in euery mans priuate house. Furthermore of 
• and Mlfilt#J. Ad haec 
1 That is, plate. Burnet has : • if 
they should work it into Vessels, or 
any Sort of Plate.' 
t As was afterward& done by Charles 
I, in t~a, when the two Univenities sent their plate to Nottingham, to be 
converted into money for the king'a 
usc. 
t Rather, 'to tbose who know it 
by expcricnce'-puiiU. 
the same mettalles they make greate cheynes with • fetters 
and giues, wherin they tye their bondmen. Finally, who 
so euer for any offence be infamed, by their eares hange 
ringes of golde ; vpon their fingers they were ringes of 
golde, and about their neckes cheynes of gold ; and in 
conclusion their heades be tiede about with golde 1• Thus, 
by all meanes that may be b, they procure to haue gold 
and siluer emong them in reproche and infamy. And 
therfore o thies metalles, which other nations do as gre­
uously and sorroufully forgo, as in a maner from their 
owne liues : if they should all togethers at ones 2 be taken 
from the vtopians, no man there wold thinke that he had 
lost the worth of one farthing. 
They gather also peerles by the sea side, and Diamondes 
and Carbuncles vpon certein rockes ; and yet they seke 
not for them ; but by chaunce finding them they cutt and 
• with omil#tl. a therefore omitted. 
Margaritas praeterea legunt in littoribus; quin in rupibus qui bus­
dam adamantes ac pyropos quoque : neque tamen quaerunt, sed 
I 'It is amusing,' as Father Bridgett 
says in his Lift (p. 184 ), • that the writer 
of all this should have been made a 
knight, or, as he was then called, Etptu 
••ralrl&, "a gilded knight," because 
this dignity both entitled him and 
required of him to wear golden in­
signia, and to deck with gold the trappings of his horse ; and that he 
should generally be represented as 
wearing round his neck one of those 
massive gold chains, which he made 
the badge of notorious malefactors 
an~ong his Utopians.' 
1 Robynson appears to have taken 
the Latin smtel for simNI. VI.] Of Utopia. 
polish them. And therwith they decke their yonge in· 
fanntes. Which, like as in the first yeares of their child· 
hod they make much and be fond and proud of such 
ornamentes, so when they be a Iitle more growen in 
yeares and discretion, perceiuing that none but children 
do were such toies and trifeles, they lay them awaye 
euen of theyre owne shamefastenes, wythowte annye 
biddyng of there parentes : euen as oure chyldren, when 
they waxe bygge, doo caste awaye nuttes, brouches, and 
puppettes 1• Therfore thyes Iawes and customes, whych 
be so farre dyfferente from all othere natyons, howe diuers 
fanseys also and myndes they doo ·cause, dydde I neuer 
so playnlye perceaue, as in the Ambassadoures of the 
Anemolians 2• 
Thyes Ambassadoures came to Amaurote whyles I was 
there. And bycause they came to entreat of greate and 
weighty matters, those .iii. citizeins a pece out of euery 
city 3 were commen thether before them. 
1 • Throwing away nuts,' for 'put­
ting away childish things,' is rather a 
Latin proverb than an En~tlish one. 
The emperor Augustus, we are told, 
would play at nuts with little children 
( Sueton.;, flila, c. All three expres­
sions maybe illustrated from Persius:-
• ••••. 
1 An appropriate name, from dlt,.l;s, 
• the wind.' Compare Cicero's usc of 
WNI-., where he calls Lepidus • homo 
'\-entosissimus' (EfiP. 
1 See above, p. II9-
[Ca. 
Ambassadours of the next contreis, which had bene 
there before, and knewe the fassions and maners of the 
Vtopians, amonge whome they perceaued no honoure 
geuen to sumptuous and coste lye.. apparrell, silkes to 
be contemned, golde also to be en famed and -reproche­
full, were wont to come thether in very homely and 
simple apparrell b. But the Anemolianes, bicause they 
dwell farre thence, and had verye Iitle acquaintaunce 
with them, hearinge that they were a1 apparelled a like, 
and that verye rudelye and homelye, thynkynge them 
not to haue the thynges whyche they dydde not weare, 
beynge therefore more proud then wise, determined in 
the gorgiousnes of their apparel to represent very god des, 
and wyth the bright shynynge and glisteringe of their 
gaye clothinge to dasell the eyes of the silie poore 
vtopains. So ther came in iii. Ambassadours with C. 
seruauntes all apparelled in chaungeable colours ; the 
moost of them in silkes ; the Ambassadours themselfes 
(for _at home in their owne countrey they were noble 
men) in cloth of gold, with great cheines of gold, with 
• and costelye omillltl. ltaque ingressi sunt legati tres, cum 
comitibus centu,m, omnes uestitu uersicolori, plerique serico, legati 
ipsi (nam domi nobiles erant) amictu aureo, magnis torquibus, et 
I This personal construction of pw­
lriiiiStls, as if the verb governed an 
accusative in the active, is fo_und in 
Ovid and Phedrus. Valla, while dis-cussing the nice distinctions of suaekw 
and jln'sw«duw, seems to allow it : 
• Qui penuasus est, plane acquiescit.' 
El•p11t. 
I 
J 
Cs. 179 
gold hanging at their eares, with gold ringes vpon their 
fingers, with brouches and aglettes of gold vpon their 
cappes, which glistered ful of peerles and pretious stones; 
to be short, trimmed and aduorned with al those thinges, 
which emong the vtopians were other the punnishement 
of bondmen, or the reproche of infamed persones, or elles 
trifels for yonge children to playe with all. Therfore it 
wolde haue done a man good at his harte to haue sene 
howe proudelye they displeyed theire pecockes fethers ; 
howe muche they made of their paynted sheathes; and 
howe loftely they sett forth and aduaunced them selfes t, 
when they compared their gallaunte apparrell with the 
poore rayment of the vtopians. For al the people were 
swarmed furth into the stretes. And on the other side 
it was no lesse pleasure to consider howe muche they 
were deceaued, and how farre they missed of their 
purpose; being contrary wayes taken then they thought 
they shoulde haue bene. For to the iyes of all the 
vtopians, excepte very fewe, whiche had bene in other 
contreys for some resonable cause, al that gorgeousnes 
of apparrel semed shamefull and reprochefull ; in so . 
1 It will be noticed how Robynson in the Latin, 'quo p.u:lo cristas t:rexe­
has here ampli1ied the single phrase rinL' 
N2 
ISO (Ca. 
much that they most reuerently saluted the vylest and 
most abiect of them for lordes ; passing ouer the Am· 
bassadours themselfes without any honour ; iudging 
them, be their wearing of golden cheynes, to be bonde· 
men. Yea, you shuld haue sene children also that had 
caste away their peerles and pretious stones, when they 
sawe the like sticking vpon the Ambassadours cappes, 
digge and pushe their mothers vnder the sides, sayinge 
thus to them : ' Loke, mother, how great a lubbor qoth yet 
were peerles and pretious stoones, as though he were 
a litel child still1.' But the mother, yea, and that also 
in good earnest : 'peace, sone,' saith she ; ' I thynk he 
be some of the A~bassadours fooles.' Some fownde 
fawte at theire golden cheynes, as to no vse nor pur· 
pose ; beynge so small and weake, that a bondeman 
·myghte easelye breake them ; and agayne so wyde and 
large, that, when it pleased him, he myght cast them of, 
and runne awaye at lybertye whether he wolde. 
But when the Ambassadoures hadde bene there a daye 
or .ii., and sawe so greate abundaunce of gold so lyghtelye 
estymed, yea, in no lesse reproche then yt was wyth them 
salutantes, legatos ipsos, ex aurearum usu catenarum pro seruis habi­
tos, sine ullo prorsus honore praetermiserunt. 
1 Tbe marginal annotator, whether deservedly called attention to the 
it be Erasmus or Peter Giles, has artistic: effect of this touch. 
CR. VI.) of Utopia. 
in honour; and, besydes that, more golde in the cheynes 
and gyues of one fugytyue bondeman, then all the costelye 
ornamentes of them .iii. was worth ; they beganne to abate 
theyre currage, and for verye shame layde awaye all that 
gorgyouse arraye wherof theye were so prowde ; and 
specyallye when they hadde talkcde famylyerlye wyth 
the Vtopyans, and hadde. learnedc all theyre fassyons 
and opynyons. For they marueyle that annye men be 
soo. folyshe as to haue delyte and pleasure in t~e • glys­
terynge of a lytyll tryfelynge stone, whych.e maye beholde 
annye of the starres, or elles the soone yt selfe ; or that 
annye man ys so madde as to counte him selfe the nobler 
for the smaller or fyner threde of wolle, whyche selfe 
same woll (be it nowe in neuere SOo fyne a sponne threde) 
dyde ones a shepe weare b ; and yet was she all that time 
no other thing than a shepe 1• 
They marueyle also that golde, whyche of the owne 
nature is a thynge so vnprofytable, is nowe emonge all 
• the doubteful. b a shepe dyde ones. 
-----------------
1 AD anticipation of the familiar lines of Dr. Watts : 
• When the poor sheep and ailkworm wore 
That very clothing long before.' 
[Ca. 
people in soo hyghe estymatyon, that man hym selfe, by 
whom, yea and for the vse of whome, yt ys so muche 
sett by, ys in muche lesse estymatyon then the golde 
yt selfe. In so muche that a lumpyshe blockehedded 
churle 1, and whyche bathe no more wytte then an asse, 
yea, and as full of noughtenes and folyshenes ", shall haue 
neuertheles many wyse and good men in subiectyon and 
bondage, onlye for thys, bycause he hathe a greate heape 
of golde. Whyche yf yt should be taken from qyme by 
annye fortune, or by some subtyll wyle b of the lawe, 
(which no lesse then fortune doth raise vp the lowe, and 
plucke downe the high) and be geuen to the most vile 
slaue and abiect dreuell of all his housholde, then shortely 
after he shall goo into the seruice of his seruaunt, as an 
augmentation or an c ouerplus besyd his money. But 
they much more marueill at and detest the madenes of 
them, whyche to those riche men, in whose debte and 
daunger 2 they be not, do giue almoste diuine honowres, 
• noughtenes as of follye. b wyle and cautele. r, 
• You stand within hia danger, do 
you notf' that is, under obligation to him. 
• The reading of the second edition, 
• nor ' for • or an,' may have been 
caused by joining the n of the pre­
ceding word to • or.' 
Ca. VI.) Of Utopia. 
for non other consideration, but bicause they be riche ; 
and yet knowing them to be suche nigeshe penny fathers t, 
that they be sure, as long as they liue, not the worthe 
of one farthinge of that heape of gold shall come to 
them. 
Thies and such like opinions haue they conceaued, 
partely by education, beinge brought vp in that common 
wealth, whose Iawes and customes be farre different 
from thies kindes of folly, and partely by good littera· 
ture and learning. For though ther be not many in 
euery citye, whiche be exempte and discharged of all 
other laboures, and appointed only to learninge; that 
is to saye, suche in whome euen from theire very child­
bode they haue perceaued a singuler towardnes, a fyne 
witte, and a minde apte to good learning; yet all in their 
childhode be instructe in learninge. And the better parte 
of the people, bothe men and women, throughe owte all 
theire hole lyffe, doo bestowe in learninge those spare 
howres, which we sayde they haue vacante from bodelye 
laboures 1• They be taugh~ learninge in theire owne 
quam quod diuites sunt, honores tantum non diuinos impendunt, 
idque cum eos tam sordidos atque auaros cognoscunt, Qaanto plus 
ut habeant certo certius ex tanto nummorum cumulo, apillllt Vtopiani 
uiuentibus illis, ne unum quidem nummulum unquam quam Chriatia­
ad se uenturum. Disciplinas ipsorum lingua 
1 Niggardlymisers. from bodily labours' lies the original 
1 See above, p. 143-In this' vacancy idea of' school.' 
[C11. For yt is bothe copious in woordes, and 
also pleasaunte to the eare, and for the vtteraunce of a 
mans min de verye perfecte and sure 1• The mooste parte 
of all that syde of the wordle 2 vseth the same Ian gage ; 
sauinge that amonge the Vtopians yt is fyneste and 
puryste ; and accordynge to the dyuersytye of the con­
treys yt ys dyuerslye alterede. 
Of all thyes Philosophers, whose names be here famous 
in thys parte of the wordle to vs knowen, before owre 
cummynge thether, nott as muche as the fame of annye of 
them was com en amonge them ; and yett in M usycke, 
Logycke, Arythmetyke, and Geometrye, they haue fownde 
owte in a manner all that oure auncyente Philosophers 
haue tawghte. But as they in all thynges be almoste 
equall to our olde auncyente clerkes, so our newe Logiciens 
perdiscunt. plagam peruagatur~ 
Ex omnibus his philosophis, quorum nomina sunt in hoc noto 
nobis orbe eelebria, ante nostrum aduentum ne fama 
Mui&:a, 
Dialectic a, 
Aritbmetic:a. Caete­
rum ut antiquos omnibus prope rebus exaequant, ita nuperorum 
1 Was More thinking of the yet un· 
developed capacity of his own mother 
tongue, when he wrote this? It should 
not, at any rate, be forgotten what 
• great services he rendered to his native 
English speech. He was, as Sir James 
Mackintosh said, ' the first person in 
our history distinguished by the faculty 
of public speaking;' and he was also 
distinguished ' as our earliest prose 
writer, and as the first Englishman 
who wrote the history of his country 
in the present language. '-Lift of Mow, 1831, p. 19-The English tongue in 
More's day, ' rough, confused, unme· 
trical, the tongue of business and the 
vulgar, was, in the lips of the educated, 
a condescension to vulgar ignorance 
and infirmity.'- See EHglislt Studils, 
by the late Professor Brewer, I88I, 
p. More's friends, Colet and 
Lily, at tht;. tinte when he wrote, were 
also ' teaching learning in their own 
native tongue.' 
' The same transposition of letters 
is left in the second edition. 
in subtyll inuentyons haue farre passed and gone beyonde 
them 1• For they haue not deuysed one of all those rules 
of restryctyons, amplyfycatyons, and supposytyons, very 
wittelye inuented in the small Logycalles 2, whyche heare 
oure chyldren in euerye place do learne. Furthermore 
they were neuer yet able to fynde out the seconde inten­
tyons 3 ; in so muche that none of them all coulde euer see 
inuentis dialecticorum Ionge sunt impares. 
Porro secundas intentiones tam Ionge abest ut inuestigare suffecerint, 
1 The marginal note gives a hint of 
the h·ony that is coming. 
1 The name of ' Parva Logicalia' 
(so called, More says laughingly in 
his letter to Dorp, because they have 
/itt/, logic in them) was given to the 
last treatise in the St~mmultU of 
Petrus Hispanus (Spanheym), after­
wards Pope John XXI. According to Mansel, his Sum­
multU Logi'cala may be regarded as 
' the earliest scholastic treatise on 
Logic which professes to be anything 
more than an abridgement of, or com­
mentary on, portions of the Organon.' 
The last treatise of the work, according 
to the same writer, ' contains sundry 
additions to the text of Aristotle, in 
the form of dissertations on SNppositio, 
ampli'alio, ratridio, uponibl• proposi­
tions, and other subtleties, more in­
genious than useful, and belonging 
rather to Grammar than to Logic.' 
There are frequent allusions to the 
Parva Logicalia in the EpistoltU Ob­
scurDI'Jim Viron~m (ed. 1557, leaf A 9 
of the Crmeil. Tlrlolog., &c.), and the 
subject is not forgotten in the Ellco­
mium Moria~ (ed. It is 
amusing to find Listrius, who joined 
in the laugh with Erasmus at these 
' plusquam scholasticas nugas,' pre-paring an edition of the St~mmulu, 
which appeared in 1520. See Gesner's 
Bibliotll«a, 1545, leaf 274 vers., and 
Mansel's .Arlis Logictu Rudimmta, 
1852, p. 
• Of this really important conception 
in logic, which formed a chief subject 
of dispute between the Thomists and 
Scotists, Mr. Hullinger gives a clear 
account in his University of CambridK', 
i. 181 : 'The intellect, as it directs 
itself (intmdms se) towards external 
objects, discerns, for example, Socrates 
in his pure individuality, and the im­
pression thus received is to be dis­
tinguished as the iltinrtio prima. But 
when the existence of Socrates has 
thus been apprehended, the reflective 
faculty comes into play; Socrates, by 
a secondary process, is recognized as 
a philosopher or as an animal ; he is 
assigned to genus and species. The 
conception thus formed constitutes 
the iJrlnrlio B«Nnda. But the intmlio 
S«Nruia exists only in relation to tlte 
human intellect, and hence cannot be 
ranked among real existences ; while 
the objects of the external world, and 
Universals which have their existence 
in the Divine mind, would exist even 
if man were not.' 
186 (CR. 
man hymselfe in commen, as they call hym 1 ; thoughe he 
be .(as yow knowe) bygger then euer was annye gyaunte, 
yea, and poynted to of vs euen wyth our fynger. But 
they be in the course of the starres, and the mouynges 
of the heauenlye spheres, verye expert and cunnynge 1. 
They haue also wyttelye excogytated and diuised instru­
mentes of diuers fassyons, wherin is exactly comprehended 
and conteyned the mouynges and sytuatyons of the sonne, 
the moone, and of all the other starres which appere in 
theyre horyzon. But as for the amityes and ~issentyons 
of the planettes, and all that deceytefull diuynatyon by the 
starres 8, they neuer asmuch as dreamed therof. Raynes, 
windes, and other courses of tempestes they knowe before 
ut nee hominem ipsum in comm1;1lli, quem uocant, quanquam (ut 
scitis) plane colosseum et quouis gigante maiorem, tum a nobis prae­
terea digito demonstratum, nemo tamen eorum uidere potuerit. At 
.A.trologia. lmbres, uentos, ac caeteras tempestatum uicissitudines signis 
' That is, man in the abstract. For 
the subject of Universals, in dispute 
between the Realists and Nominalists, 
see Hampden's Scloolastir: Plrilosoplry, 
1833, p. 71, and the passages from 
Prantl, quoted by Mullinger, 11$ above, 
pp. 
• This was in accordance- with 
More's own tastes. • If an astronomer 
came in his way,' says Seebohm. 
quoting Stapleton, ' he would get him 
to stay awhile in his house, to teach 
them all about the stars and planets.' 
Oxfortl R4'., 1869, p. SOO· 
1 • No class of men,' writes the 
author of Plrilomon16, ' came more frequently under the lash than the 
pretenders to astrology. Many years 
ago More had exposed their noto­
rious failure in his elegy upon the 
death of Elizabeth of York, who died 
in the very year in which they had 
predicted for her all manner of pro· 
sperity :-
•Yet was I lately promised other­
wise, 
This year to live in weltbe and 
delice.' 
See the P/riloHwnls, ed. 
1133 eqq., where translations are given 
of some of More's epigrams ;, astro-
lop. VL] Of Gtopia. 
by certein tokens, which they haue learned by long vse 
and obseruation 1• But of the causes of all thies thinges, 
of the ebbinge, flowinge, and saltenes of the sea, and 
fynallye of the orygynall begynnyng and nature of heauen 
and of the wordle, they holde partelye the same opynyons 
that our olde philosophers holde ; and partelye, as our 
philosophers varye emonge themselfes, so they also, whiles 
they bringe new reasons of thynges, doo disagree from all 
them, and yet emonge ~hemselfes in all poyntes they doo 
not accorde. 
In that part of philosophie which intreateth of manners 
and vertue 2, theire reasons and opynyons agree wyth 
ours. They dyspute of the good qualytyes of the sowle, 
of the body, and of fortune ; and whether the name of 
goodnes 3 maye be applied to all thies, or onlie to the 
endowmentes and giftes of the sowle. They reason of 
vertue and pleasure. But the chiefe and principall question 
is in what thynge, be yt one or moo, the felycytye of man 
consisteth. But in thys poynte theye seme almooste to 
quibusdam Iongo perspectis usu praesentiunt. At hac in re propensiores aequo tatem hone~~ta 
1 Compare what was said of the 
City of the Sun, above, p. 
• Ethics, or moral philosophy. 
1 The m.u-ginal note • Fines bono· rum' points the reference to Cicero's 
treatise. In what foUows, frequent 
references to the Ih Fi~tibu will ap­
pear. 
188 [CR. 
muche geuen and enclyned to the opinion of them whiche 
defende pleasure ; wherin they determine other all or the 
chiefyste parte of mans felycytye to reste 1• And (whyche 
is more to bee marueled at) the defence of thys soo deyntye 
and delycate an opynyon they fetche euen from theyre 2 
graue, sharpe, bytter, and rygorous relygyon. For they 
neuer dyspute of felycytye or blessednes, but they ioyne to 
the reasons of Philosophye certeyne pryncyples taken owte 
of relygyon; wythoute the whyche, to the inuestygatyon 
of trewe felycytye, theye thynke reason of yt selfe weak 
and vnperfecte. Thoose pryncyples be thyes and suche 
tyke : That the sowle ys immortal1, and by the bountifull 
goodnes of God ordeyned to felicitie :-That to our vertues 
and good deades rewardes be apoynted after this lyfe, aod 
to our euell deades punyshementes. Haec tametsi 
1 This malting the people of Utopia 
to be Epicureans in philosophy is in 
accordance with what Vesputius had 
written of some of his newly-dis­
covered tribes :-• Quid vltra dicam! 
viuunt secundliiD naturam, et 'f>Ycuri 
potius dici possunt quam stoici.'-See 
the Jlunthu nouus, before quoted, 
fol. 
• The insertion of this word spoils b Christiani dubitant, B. 
the sense. The religion of the 
Utopians was not • sharpe, bytte1· and 
rygorous.' Burnet's rendering is 
better: • and, what may seem more 
strange, they malte use of arguments 
even from religion, notwithstanding 
its severity and roughness, for the 
support of that opinion, so indulgent 
to plequrc.' 
CR. VI.) Of Utopia. 
perteynyng to religion, yet they thynke it mete that they 
shoulde be beleued and graunted by profes of reason. 
But if thies principles were condempned and dysanulled, 
then without anye delaye they pronounce no man to be so 
folish, whiche woulde not do all hys diligence and en­
deuoure to obteyne pleasure be ryght or wronge, onlye 
auoydynge this inconuenience, that the lesse pleasure 
should not be a let or hynderaunce to the bygger ; or that 
he laboured not for that pleasure whiche would bryng 
after it displeasure, greefe, and sorrowe 1• For they iudge 
it extreame madnes to folowe sharpe and peinful vertue, 
and not only to bannyshe the pleasure of lyfe, but also 
wyllyngly to suffre grief without any hope of proffyt 
thereof•. For what proffyt can there be, if a man, when 
he hath passed ouer all hys lyfe vnpleasauntly, that is to 
say, wretchedlye b, shall haue no rewarde after hys death ? 
• therof ensuinge. b miserablye. 
1 Epicurus himself taught the neces­
sity of this temperance in the enjoy­
ment of pleasure. It was a boast of 
his, Seneca tells us, that he could dine 
for less than an a, while it cost 
Metrodorus the whole of that sum 
(about three farthings) for his dinner. 
The peculiar pleasure of the feat lay 
in the consciousness of beinr able to 
dispense with what lower natures found necessary to enjoyment. 
1 A postdas&ical word, found in 
Aulus Gellius. 
But now, syr, they thynke not felicitie to reste in all 
pleasure, but onlye in that pleasure that is good and 
honest ; and that hereto, as to perfet blessednes, our 
nature is allured and drawen euen of vertue; wherto only 
they that be of the contrary opinion do attribute felicitie. 
For they define vertue to be a • life ordered according to 
nature 1 ; and that we be hereunto ordeined of god ; and 
that he doth followe the course of nature, which in desier­
ing and refusyng thynges is ruled by reason. Furthermore, 
that reason doth chiefelie and pryncipallye kendle in men 
the loue and veneration of the deuyne maiestie ; of whoes 
goodnes it is that we be, and that we be impossibilitie b to 
attayne felicite. And that, secondarely, it moueth and 
prouoketh vs to leade ()ur lyfe out of care 1 in ioye and 
myrth, and to helpe all other o, in respecte of the sosiete 
"' a DMiiiJ. • in possibilitie (/Jf'iltl«l as oM worrl). 
• [and .•• other] and also moueth us to helpe and further all other. 
1 This is the Stoical definition of 
virtue. Upsius, in his 
Jla,.,tJ.,clio atl Sloialm Pllilosopltiam 
(ed. 171, quotes a number of 
passages to the same effect. John, who refers to this pas­
sage of Upeius in his comment..ry on the Utopia, adds: ' The only difficulty 
appears to be to determine what it is 
to live according to nature; for I ima­
gine that every man will be sure to 
conceive that nature sanctions what 
he thinks right.' 
1 Lat. fiUUH • • • mi,;""' a~Uiam, ' as 
little careful as may be,' in the old 
sense of e~Jrrjlll (Phil. VI.) Of Utopia. 
of nature, to obteyne • the same. For there was neuer 
man so earnest and paynefull a follower of vertue, and 
hater of pleasure, that woulde so inioyne you laboures, 
watchinges, and fastinges t, but he would also exhort you 
to ease and lighten to b your powre the lacke and myserye 
of others ; praysyng the same as a dede of humanitie and 
pitie. Then if it be 2 a poynte of humanitie for man to 
bryng health and comforte to man, and speciallye (whiche 
is a vertue moste peculiarlye belongynge to man) to mitigate 
and assuage the grief of others, and by takyng from them 
the sorowe and heuynes of lyfe, to restore them to ioye, 
that is to saye to pleasure ; whye maye it not then be sayd 
that nature doth prouoke euerye man to doo the same to 
hymselfe? 
For a ioyfull lyfe, that is to saye, a pleasaunt lyfe, is 
other euell ; and if it be so, then thou shouldest not onlye 
helpe no man therto, but rather, as muche as in the lieth, 
helpe c all men from it, as noysome and hurtefull ; or els, 
if thou not onlye mayste, but also of dewtie art bounde to 
.. • cue, lighten and relieue to. 'ti ad' At nunc quidam utpote noxtam ac mort1 eram quantum potes 1mere ; accerountdo......,., 
aut, si conciliare aliis earn, ut bonam, non ,licet modo, uehtt In his oita 
1 There is an allusion in the English, 
but not in the Latin, to 11 Cor. 5· 
' It will be seen that Robynson, 
perhaps rightly, makes a dill'erent arrangement of the Latin sentences 
from that in the te:r.L He places a 
full stop after «rtMG~, and only a 
comma after rwltkn. 
(CR. 
procure it to others, why not chiefely to theself, to whome 
thou art bound to shewe as muche fauour• as to other? 
For when natur biddeth the to be good and gentle to 
other, she commaundeth the not to be cruell and vngentle 
to the selfe. Therfore euen very nature 1 (saye they) pre­
scribith to vs a ioyfull lyfe, that is to saye, pleasure, as the 
ende of all our operations. And they defyne vertue to be 
lyfe ordered accordyng to the prescrypt of nature 2• But 
in that that nature dothe allure and prouoke men one to 
healpe an other to lyue merilye (whiche suerlye she doth 
not 3 without a good cause ; for no man is so farre aboue 
the lot of mans state or condicion, that nature doth carke 
and care for hym only, whiche equallye fauoureth all that 
be comprehended vnder the communion of one shape, 
forme, and fassion), verely she commaundeth the to vse 
diligent circumspection, that thou do not so seke for 
thine owne commodities, that thou procure others incom­
modities. 
1 See above, p. 
• Join' not without.' 
Ca. VI.] Of Utopia. 193 
Wherfore their opinioa is, that not onlye couenauntes 
and bargaynes made amonge priuate men ought to be 
well and faythfullye fulfylled, obserued, and kept, but also 
commen .Iawes; whiche other a good prince hath iustly 
publyshed, or els the people, nother oppressed with 
tyranny, nother deceaued by fraude and gyell, hath by 
their common consent constitute and ratifyed, concernyng 
the particion of the commodities of lyfe,-that is to say, the 
matter 1 of pleasure. Thies Iawes not offendid, it is wys­
dome that thou looke to thyne own wealthe. And to do 
the same for the common wealth is no lesse then thy duetie, 
if thou bearest any reuerent loue or any naturall zeale and 
affection to thy natiue contrey. But to go about to let an 
other man of his pleasure, whiles thou procurest thyne 
owne, that is open wrong. Contrary wyse, to withdrawe 
somethynge from they selfe to geue to other, that is 
a pointe of humanitie and gentylnes; whiche neuer taketh 
a waye so muche commoditie, as it bryngeth agayne. 
For it is recompensed with the retourne of benefytes ; 
and the conscience of the good dede, with the remem­
braunce of the thankefull loue and beneuolence of them 
Seruanda igitur censent non inita solum inter priuatos pacta, sed 
publicas etiam leges, quas aut bonus princeps iuste 
Pacta et leges. 
• That ia, the materiaL 
0 
194 (Ca. 
to whom thou hast done it, dot~brynge more pleasure to 
thy mynde, then that whiche thou hast withholden from 
thy selfe could haue brought to the• bodye. Finallye (which 
to a godly disposed and a religious mind is easie to be 
persuaded), God recompenseth the gifte of a short and 
small pleasure with great and euerlastinge ioye. Therfore, 
the matter diligentlie wayde and considered, thus they 
thinke : that all our actions, and in them the vertues 
themselfes, be referred at the last to pleasure, as theire 
ende and felicitie. 
Pleasure they call euery motion and state of the bodie 
or mynde, wherin man hath naturally delectation. Appetite 
they ioyne to nature 1, and that not without a good cause. 
For like as not only the senses, but also right reason, 
coueteth whatsoeuer is naturally pleasaunt ; so that it b 
may be gotten without wrong or iniurie, not letting or 
debarring a greater pleasur, nor causing painful labour ; 
euen so those thinges that men by vaine ymagination, do 
• thy. More bad given 
the Utopian definition of pleasure as 
' every motion or state of body or 
mind, in which Nature teaches us to 
find delight.' It is an essential part 
of this definition that Nature should be the guide. Hence • they add, with 
good reason, the appetite (or indina­
tionJ of Nature,' without which many 
things might be taken for pleasures, 
which were not really so. If this 
view be right, ftlllwrru is genith·e, not 
dative. VI.] of Utopia. 195 
fayne against nature to be pleasaunt (as though it lay in 
their powre to chaunge the thinges as they do the names 
of thinges), al suche pleasurs they beleue to be of so small 
helpe and furtheraunce to felicitie, that they counte them 
great • let and hinderaunce ; because that, in whom they 
haue ones taken place, all his mynde they possesse with 
a false opinion of pleasure ; so that there is no place left 
for true and naturall delectacions. For there be manye 
thynges, whiche of their owne nature conteyne no 
plesauntnes; yea the moste part of them muche grief and 
sorrow ; and yet, through the peruerse and malicious 
flickering inticementes of lewde and vnhoneste desyres, be 
taken not only for speciall and souereigne pleasures, but 
also be counted amonge the chiefe causes of life. 
In this counterfeat kinde of pleasure they put them that 
I speake of before ; which, the better gown they haue on, 
. the better men they thynke them selfes. In the whiche 
thynge they doo twyse erre. For they be no lesse de· 
ceaued in that they thynke their gowne the better, than 
they be in that they thinke themselfes the better. For if 
• a great. 
yow consider the profitable vse of the garmente, whye 
shoulde wulle of a fyner sponne threde be thoughe • 
better, then the wul of a course sponne threde 1 ? Yet 
they, as though the one dyd passe the other by nature, 
and not by their mistakyng, auaunce themselfes and thinke 
the price of their owne persones therby greatly en creased. 
And therfore the honoure, whiche in a course gowne they 
durste not haue lokyd for, they require as it were of dewtie 
for their fyner gownes sake. And if they be passed by 
without reuerence,. they take it angerlye b and disdayn· 
fully. 
And agayne is it not a o lyke madnes to take a pride 
in vayne and vnprofitable honoures? For what naturall 
or trewe pleasure doest thou take of an other m~ns bare 
hede or bowed knees ? Will thys ease the payne of thy 
knees, or remedye the phrensie of thy heade? In this 
ymage of counterfeyte pleasure, they be of a maruelous 
madnes, which for the opinion of nobilitie 2 reioyse muche 
in their owne conceite, because it was their fortune to 
come of suche auncetours, whoes stocke of Ionge tyme 
• So loo in the and ttl. for thought. b displeasauntly. 
1 More has used the same com- 1 That is, in fancying tbemselves 
parison before, p. VI.] of Otopfa. 197 
hath bene counted ryche (for nowe nobilitie is nothynge 
elles 1), specially ryche in Iandes. And though their 
auncetours left them not one fote of Iande, or els they 
themselfes haue pyssed it agaynste the walles 1, yet they 
thynke themselfes not the lesse noble therefore of one 
heare 3• 
In thys numbre also they counte them that take plea­
sure and delyte (as I saide ') in gemmes and precious 
stones, and thynke themselues almoste goddes, if they 
chaunce to gette an ·excellent one ; speciallye of that 
kynde whyche in that tyme of their owne contreye men 
is had in hyghest estimation. For one kynde of stone 
kepeth not hys pryce styli in all contreis, and at all tymes. 
, Nor they bye them not but taken out of the golde and 
bare ; no, nor so nother, before • they haue made the 
seller ~o sweare that he wyll warraunte and assure it to 
• \"ntyll. 
mam ac lapidem uerum esse; tam solliciti sunt ne oculis eorum 
' The ' humiliation of the baronage 
by exhaustion, impoverishment, and 
reduction of numbers,' consequent on 
the Wars of the Roses, and the line 
of policy followed by Henry VII, 
tended to make such of the English 
nobility as were left in More's time 
follow their sovereign's eiaJDple, and 
seek to repair their fortunes by de­
veloping their estates. Hence one cause of the indosures so much com­
plained of. See Bishop Stubbs : M,. 
dinxd a~ttl Motkm History, p. 390· 
• • Squandered it away.'-Burnet. 
• That is, not a whit the less noble. 
1 See above, p. It is recorded 
of Henry VII that ' much ofthe money 
he laid by he appears to have invested 
in the purchase of jewels. '-Gairdner, 
as before, p; 149-
198 
be a trewe stone and no counterfeyt geme. Suche care 
they take lest a counterfet stone shoulde deceaue their 
eyes in the" steade of a right stone. But whye shouldest 
thou not take euen as muche pleasure in beholdynge 
a counterfette stone, whiche thyne eye cannot discerne 
from a ryght stone? They should both be of lyke value 
to the, euen as to a b blynde man. What shall I saye of 
them that kepe superfluous ryches, to take delectacion 
only in the beholdynge, and not in the \'se or occupyenge 
therof? Do they take trewe pleasure, or els be they de­
ceaued with false pleasure ? Or of them that be in 
a contrary vice, hydynge the golde whiche they shall 
neuer occupie \ nor peraduenture neuer see more ; and, 
whiles they take care leaste they shall Ieese it, do Ieese 
it in dede? For what is it elles, when they hyde it in 
the grounde, takynge it bothe from their owne vse, and 
perchaunce from all other mens also ? And yet thou, 
when thou haste hidde thye treasure, as one out of all 
care, hoppest for ioye 2• The whyche treasure if it 
• the omitt#tl. "the. 
1 See the note above, p. Lumby, in the Glossary to his 
edition of the Utopia takes ' hoppest • 
here as = ' hopest.' But it is plainly 
what we express by • jump for joy.' Compare ' leap for joy' in St. and the use of 'hop' (though in 
a dift"erent sense) in the older version 
of the Psalms, lxviii. VI.) Of Utopia. 199 
shoulde chaunce to bee stoolen, and thou, ignoraunt of 
the thefte, shouldest dye tenne yeares after ; all that 
tenne yeares space that thou lyuedest, after thy money 
was stolen, what matter was it to the whether it hadde 
bene taken a waye, or els sauffe as thou lefteste it ? 
Truelye bothe wayes lyke proffyt came to the. 
To thyes so foolyshe pleasures they ioyne dycers t, 
whoes madnes they knowe by heare say and not by vse ; 
hunters also, and hawkers. For what pleasure is there 
(saye they) in castynge the dice vpon a table; which 
thu a hast done so often, that if theire were anye pleasure 
in it, yet the ofte vse myghte make the werye therof? 
Or what delite can there be, and not rather dyspleasure, 
in hearynge the barkynge and howlynge of dogges 2? 
a thou. 
Ad has tam ineptas laetitias aleatores (quorum insa-A lea. 144, and compare 
the Colloquium Smile of Erasmus : 
• EU. 
Mare non possum dicere, sed scopulus, 
plurimorum infamis exitiis, Latine di­
citur Aim.' It is noticeable that in 
the Praw of Folly Erasmus places 
near together, as More does here, 
dice-players and bunters. The mad­
ness of the ga.nbler, however, be 
assigns ' rather to the furies than to 
Folly.'- Kennet's tr., p. 
I It may seem as if these were not always More's real sentiments. For 
in one of the ' pageauntes' which be 
devised in his youth come the lines : 
• Manhod I am : therefore I me 
delyght 
To hunt and bawke, to nourishe 
vp and fede 
The graybounde to the course, the 
bawke to the flyght, 
And to bestryde a good and lusty 
stede: 
These lhynges become a very man 
in dede.' 
E..glisA Wora,teaf • iij. But the cast 
200 [Ca. 
Or what greater pleasure is there to be felte, when 
a dogge followeth an hare, then when a dogge followeth 
a dogge ? for one thynge is done in both ; that is to saye, 
runninge ; if thou haste pleasure therein. But if the hope 
of slaughter, and the expectation of tearynge in pieces 
the beaste dothe please the, thou shouldest rather be 
moued with pitie to see a seely innocent hare murdered 
of a dogge ; tlie weake of the stronger ; the fearefull of 
the fearce; the innocente of the cruell and vnmercyfull. 
Therefore all thys exercyse of huntynge, as a thynge 
vnworthye to be vsed of free men, the Vtopians haue 
reiected to their bochers; to the whiche crafte (as wee 
sayde before) they appointe ther bondmen. For they 
counte huntyng the loweste, vyleste "', and moste abiecte 
parte of bocherye 1 ; and the other partes of it more 
• the vyleste. 
in lanios (quam artem per seruos obire eos supra dixi­
mus) reicerunt, infimam enim eius partem esse uenationem statuunt, 
of More's mind was too serious. not 
to say austere, to suffer him long to 
take pleasure in sports, even of the 
manlier kind. ' God sent men hither 
to wake and work,' he wrote later on ; 
' and as for sleepe and gaming (if any 
gaming be rood in this vale of mise rye, 
in this time of teares), it must &erue 
but for a refreshing of the wearye 
and forewatched body, to renewe it 
vnto watche and labour agayne' (lb 
p. The characten seem re­
versed, when we compare with this 
the tracts on hunting and hawking written by a lady abbess, Dame Juliana 
Bernen, and printed during More's 
childhood. Extracts from them are 
given in Warton's E"'{lisla Poetry, 
sect. 
1 Robynson, after his manner, mul­
tiplies his author's epithets by three. 
StilJ, the expressions in the Latin are 
sufficiently strong to make us admire 
More·s courage in thus assailing the 
favourite pastimes of his age and 
country. Erasmus, as usual, is at one 
with him. ' When they have run 
down their game,' he makes Folly say 
CR. VI.] of Utopia. 201 
profytable and more honeste, as whiche do brynge • muche 
more commoditie ; and doo kyll b beastes onlye for neces· 
sytie. Where as the hunter seketh nothynge but pleasure 
of the seely and wofull beastes 1 slaughter and murder. 
The whiche pleasure in beholdyng death they thynke 
clothe ryse in the very beastes, other of a cruell affection 
of mynde, or els to be chaunged in continuaunce of time 
into crueltie, by Ionge vse of so cruell a pleasure. Thies 
therfore and all suche lyke, which is innumerable, though 
the common sorte of people doth take them for pleasures, 
yet they, seyng there is no naturall pleasauntnes in them, 
do playnelye determine them to haue no affinitie with 
trewe and right pleasure. Far as touchyng that they do 
commonlye moue the sence with delectacion (whiche 
semeth to be a worke of pleasure) thys doth nothing 
• as bryngynge. II in that they kyll. conseruant, A 
of the hunters, 1 what strange pleasure 
they take in cutting it up I Cows and 
sheep may be slaughtered by common 
butchers, but what is killed in hunting 
must be broken up by none under a 
gentleman.' The formalities are then 
duly described (Kennet's tr., as before, 
p. Gilbert Wakefield, writing to 
Fox, who had met with an accident 
when out shooting, reads him a homily 
on the text 1 indignae homine docto 
voluptates' ( Cic. IR Off. 1 ), in which he pronounces 1 those pleasures to 
misbecome a man of letters, which 
consist in mangling, maiming and 
depriving of that invaluable and irre· 
trievable blessing, its existence, an 
inoffensive pensioner on the universal 
bounty of the common Feeder and Pro­
tector of all his offspring.' -Cotnspon­
dnla ofWallefoltlantl Fox, 1813, p. 79· 
1 Burnet preserves the force of the 
diminutive .,.,"ma/culi, 1 of so small 
and miserable an Animal.' 
-' 
202 [Ca. 
diminishe their opmton. For not the nature of the 
thynge,-but there peruerse and lewde custome is the 
cause hereof; whiche causeth them to accepte bitter or 
sowre thinges for swete thinges ; euen as women with 
childe, in their viciate and corrupt taste, thinke pitche 
and tallowe sweter then anye bonney. Howbeit no 
mans iudgement, depraued and corrupte, other by sicke­
nes or by custome, can chaunge the nature of pleasure, 
more then it can doo the natur of other thinges. 
They make diuers kyndes of trew• pleasures. For 
som they attribute to the soule, and som to the bodye. 
To the soule they gyue intellygence, and that delectation 
that cummeth of the contemplation of truthe. Here vnto 
is ioyned the pleasaunt remembraunce of the good lyfe 
past 1• 
The pleasure of the bodye they deuide into ii. 
The first is when delectation is sensibly felte and perceaued: 
• lr.ew D11fiJtetl. Corporis 
mrporiL uoluptatem in duas partilmtur formas, quarum prima 
sit ea quae sensum perspicua suauitate perfundit ; quod alias earum 
I As Dibdin points oat, Robynson 
omits altogether the concluding words 
of the Latin, 'I 8/¥6 "o" tlullia futun' 
IKmi. Burnet correctly renders, • and 
the assured Hopes of a future Hap­
piness.' 1 Citta, in Greelr. 1tCTTG or lt(auo, was 
a word used to denote a jay or magpie, 
and then, lilr.e Galen's ltiTTflaar, the 
false appetite or longing referred to 
in the: text.-See Mayne's Expository 
LuicoH (186o), p. VI.] Of Utopia. 203 
whiche many times 'chaunceth by the renewing and re­
fresshyng of thoes partes which owre natural} heate 
drieth vp: thys cummeth by meate and drynke: and 
sumtymes whyles those thynges be" voided, wherof is in 
the body ouer great abundaunce. This pleasure is felte 
when wee doo our naturall easemente, or when we be 
doynge the acte of generatyon, or when the ytchynge of 
annye parte is eased with rubbynge or stratchinge. Sum­
times pleasure riseth, exhibitinge to any membre nothing 
that it desireth, nor taking from it any payne that it feeleth; 
which for all that b tikleth and moueth our senses with 
a certein secrete efficacy, but with a manifest motion, 
and o turneth them to it ; as is that which cummeth of 
musicke. 
The second part of bodely pleasure they say is that 
which consisteth and resteth in the quiete and vpright 1 
state of the body. And that truelye is euery mans owne 
• ~ espulsed and. • and 0111iltltl. 
Alteram corporeae uoluptatis fonnam eam uolunt esse, quae in 
quieto atque aequabili corporis statu consistat ; id est nimirum sua 
1 This word appears sometimes to 
have ~en used as simply equivalent 
to ' right,' without any idea of erect­
ness. So the Greek orllr06. But the 
Latin ralher means ' well balanced,' 
with all the humours, &c., in proper 
temperament. From this comes what 
Paley calls ' that harmonious con· formation,' which he says 'gives to 
the mind its sense of complacency 
and satisfaction.' MOI'fll Plrilosoplry, 
Bk I. Compare also Cic. Ih 
Off. For thys, yf yt be not letted nor assaulted with 
no greiffe 1, is delectable of yt selfe, thoughe yt be 
moued wyth no externall or outwarde pleasure. For 
though it be not so plain and manyfeste to the sense, as 
the gredye luste of eatynge and drynckynge, yet neuer­
thelesse manye take it for the chyefeste pleasure. All the 
Vtopyans graunte yt to be a ryghte greate"' pleasure, 
and as yow wolde saye the foundatyon and grownde of all 
pleasures; as whyche. euen alone ys able to make the 
state and condytyon of lyffe delectable and p'Ieasaunte ; 
and, yt beynge ones taken awaye, there ys no place lefte 
for annye pleasure. For to be wythowte greyffe, not 
hauinge health, that they call vnsensybylyte and not 
pleasure. The Vtopians haue Ionge agoo reiected and 
condempned the opynyon of them, whyche sayde that 
stedfaste and quyete healthe (for thys questyon also hath 
bene dylygentelye debated emonge them) owghte not 
therefore to be cownted a pleasure, bicause they saye yt 
can not be presentlye and sensyblye perceaued and felte 
• souereigne. See the Glossary. VI.] of Utopia. 205 
by some owtwarde 1 motion. But, of the contrarye parte, 
nowe they agree almoste all in thys, that healthe ys 
a moste souereygne pleasure. For seinge that in syckenes 
(saye they) is grieffe, which is a mortal ennemie to pleasure, 
euen as sicknes is to health, why shuld not then pleasure 
be in the quietnes of health? For they say it maketh 
nothing to thys matter, whether yow saye that sickenes is 
a griefe, or that in sickenes is griefe ; for all cummeth to 
one purpose. For whether health be a pleasure it selfe, 
or a necessary cause of pleasure, as fyer is of heate, truelye 
bothe wayes it foloweth, that they cannot be without 
pleasure that be in perfyt healthe. Furthermore, whyles 
we eate (saye they), then health, whi<;he began to be 
appayred, fyghteth by the helpe of foode against hunger. 
In the whych fighte whyles healthe by lytle and lytle 
getteth the vpper han de, that same procedyng 2, and (as 
ye would say) that onwardnes to the wonte strengthe 
sentem non posse dicerent, nisi motu quopiam contrario, sentiri. Praeterea dum uescimur, 
inquiunt, quid aliud quam sanitas, quae labefactari coeperat, aduersus 
esurientem (cibo commilitone) depugnat? in qua dum paulatim inua­
lescit, ille ipse profectus ad solitum uigorem suggerit illam, qua sic 
1 Burnet paraphrases : • Some have 
thought that there was no Pleasure, 
but what was excited by some sensible 
Motion in the Body.' Both translators 
negleet the proper meaning of nm­
lrrlrio, and Robynson in addition 
ignores the presence of Hitli: It is 
literally : • sayir•g that its presence 
c:ould not be felt ezcept by some op-posite emotion.' More ezplains more 
fully afterwards what he means by 
this. when be speaks of the pleasure 
felt in eating, for eumple, as measured 
by the displacement of the opposite 
pain of hunger. 
• In the sense of • progress' (pro­
/lldull). 
mynistreth that pleasure, wherbye wee be so refresshed. 
Health therefore, whiche in the conflycte is ioyfull, shaH 
it not bee merye when it hathe gotten the victory 1? But 
as sone as it hathe recouered thee pristynate strengthe, 
whyche thinge onelye in all the fyghte it coueted, shall it 
incontinent be astonied ? Nor shall it not knowe nor 
imbrace the owne wealthe and goodnes? For that • it is 
sayed healthe can not be felte, this, they thinke, is nothing 
trew. For what man wakynge, say they, feleth not hym­
selfe in health, but he that is not 1? Is there annye man 
so possessed wyth stonyshe insensibilitie, or with the 
sleping sicknes b, that he wyll not graunt health to be 
acceptable to hym and delectable? But what other thing 
is delectation, than that whiche by an other name is called 
pleasure? 
They imbrace chiefely 3 the pleasures of the mind. For 
• where. b the Jethargie. Quis enim 
uigilans, inquiunt, sanum esse se non sentit, nisi qui non est ? Quem 
ne tantus aut stupor aut lethargus adstringit, ut sanitatem non iucun­
dam sibi fateatur ac delectabilem 1 at delectatio quid aliud quam alio 
nomine uoluptas est ? 
Amplectuntur ergo in primis animi uoluptates (eas enim primas 
1 Burnet renders : ' And if the Con­
flict is Pleasure, the Victory must yet 
breed a greater Pleasure.' But this, 
though neat, does not give the point 
of the antithesis, rightly observed 
by Robynson, between ladflhtr and 
grnuMbil. There is in those words the 
same contrast as between 'joy ' and 
'gladness;' the latter denoting what 
Robynson calls • being merry,' the 
state of calm cheerfulness when vic­
tory Is won. Tennyson showed his perception ofthe difference, when, in 
his translation of a passage from the 
Iliad (viii. 542--561), he altered • the 
hind rejoices at the heart' to ' the 
shepherd gladdens at his heart.' 
I Burnet, more clearly, ' for what 
man is in health, that does not per­
ceive it [is not conscious of it] when 
he is awake J' 
• ~word 'therefore' ( ugo) should 
have been introduced ; this being a 
conclusion from what goes before. VI.] of Utopia. 207 
them they cownte the chiefist and most principall of all. 
The cheyfe parte of them they thinke doth come of the 
exercise of vertue, and conscience of good lyffe. Of thies 
pleasures that the boddye ministreth they geue the pre­
emynence to helth. For the delyte of eating and drincking, 
and whatsoeuer hath anny like pleasauntnes, they deter­
myne to be pleasures muche to be desiered, but no other 
wayes than for healthes sake. For suche thynges of 
theyre owne propre nature be Dot"' pleasaunte, but in 
that they resyste syckenes preuelye stealynge one 1• 
Therefore, lyke as yt ys a wyse mans parte rather to 
auoyde syckenes, then to wyshe for medycynes, and 
rather to dryue away and put to flyghte carefull greyffes 2, 
then to call for com forte; so yt ys much better not to 
neade thys kynde of pleasure, then in sealynge 3 the con­
trarye greyffe to be eased of the same h. The whyche 
kynde of pleasure yf annye man take for hys felycytye, 
that man muste nedes graunte, that then he shall be in 
"'not so. b [then in •.. same] then thereby to be eued of the contrarie 
omnium principesque ducunt) quarum potissimum partem censent ab 
exercitio uirtutum bonaeque uitae conscientia proficisci. 
1 The phrase here used might recall 
one of the first precepts of the Schola 
Salemitana for obtaining health: Curas 
tolle gra\·es.' But the Latin has simply 
tlolora, • pains.' 1 Robynson's meaning is: • than, 
by stopping the opposite pain (as of 
hunger, when we eat), to gain a 
sensation of pleasure.' This is an 
expansion of the single word tk/;,;,; 
(tklmiri), • to feel the ptification.' 
208 [Ca. 
mooste felycytye, yf he lyue that lyffe whyche ys ledde 
in contynuall honger, thurste, itchynge, eatynge, drynk­
ynge, scratchynge, and rubbynge 1• The whyche lyffe 
howe not onlye foule yt is •, but also myserable and 
wretched, who perceauethe not? Thyes dowteles be the 
baseste pleasures of all, as vnpure and vnperfecte. For 
they neuer cum but accompanied wyth their cont(ary 
greiffes. As with the pleasure of eatinge is ioyned hunger, 
and that after no very egal sort. For of thies ii. the 
gryeffe is bothe the more vehement, and also of longer 
continuaunce. For it rysethe b before the pleasure, and 
endeth not vntyll the pleasure dye wyth it. 
Wherfore such pleasures they think not greatly to be 
set by, but in that they be necessary. Howbeit they haue 
delite also in thies, and thankfully knowledge the tender 
loue of moth~r nature, which with most plesaunt delecta­
tion allureth her children to that, which of necessitye they 
be driuen often vsec. 'For how wretched and miserable 
• TM wonls yt is lrrnlsjiow to com• after wretched. b beginncth. 
• [which •.• vse] to the necessarie vse wherof they must from time to time 
continually be forced and driuen. Quanto enim in tedio uiuendum erat, si ut 
1 This is the hom of the dilemma 
on which Socrates impales Callicles in 
the Gcwgia, I 495· If pleasure con­
sists in counteracting painful sensa-tions, then those sensations must be 
always present, or the counteraction, 
in which lies the pleasure, could not 
go on. VI.) Of (Jtopia. 209 
should our liffe be, if thies daily greiffes of hunger and 
thrust coulde not be dreuen away, but with bitter potions, 
and sower medicines ; as the other deseases be, where 
with we be seldomer trowbled ? But bewtye, strengthe, 
nemblenes, thies, as peculiare and pleasaunte giftes of 
nature, they make muche of. But those pleasures which 
be receaued by the eares, the iyes, and the nose; which 
nature willeth to be proper and peculiar to man 1 (for no 
other kind of liuing beastes • doth behold the fayrenes 
and the bewtie of the worlde, or is moued with anny 
respect of sauours, but only for the diuersity of meates, 
nother perceaueth the concordaunt and discordante dis­
taunces of soundes and tunes) thies pleasures (I say) they 
accept and allowe, as certein pleasaunt reioysinges 2 of 
liffe. But in all thinges thys cautell they vse, that a lesse 
pleasure hinder not a bigger, and that the pleasur be no 
cause of dyspleasur; whych they thinke to followe of 
e necessytye, if the pleasure be vnhoneste. But yet to 
dyspyse the comlynes of bewtye, to waste the bodylye 
• no other liuinge creature. Compare also 
the familiar lnea of Ovid, 11•1. 
p 1 Bumet"s rendering gives the force 
of crmd•._la better: ' as the. pleasant 
Relishes and Seasonings of Life.' 
210 (CR· VI. 
strengthe, to tourne nymblenes into sloughishnes, to con­
sume and make feble the bod dye wyth fastynge 1, to doo 
iniury to health, and to reiect the other• pleasaunte motyons 
of nature (onles a man neglecte thies hys b commodytyes, 
whyles he doth wyth a feruent zeale procure the wealth 
of others, or the commen proffytte, for the whyche plea­
sure forborne he is in hope of a greater pleasure of 
Goo"): els for a vayne shaddowe ofvertue, for the wealthe 
and proffette of no man, to punyshe hymselfe, or to the.. 
intente he maye be able courragiouslye to suffre aduer­
sitye, whyche perchaunce shall neuer come to hym: thys 
to doo they thynke it a poynte of extreame madnes, and 
a token of a man cruelly minded towardes hymselfe, and 
vnkynd towarde nature, as one so dysdaynynge to be in 
her daunger 2, that he renounceth and refuseth all her 
benefytes. 
Thys is theire sentence and opinion of vertue and 
• other omitl#d. 
1 More doubly guards himself against 
any unfair use being made of his words, 
(I) by the proviso that such bodily 
mortifications are not undergone for 
the public good or the welfare of 
others; and (111) by the addition, later 
on, of a disclaimer of any approval 
of eustoms and opinions which he is 
simply relating. But when every allow-ance is rightly made, the reader will 
judge whether there is not here a 
condemnation of the ascetic spirit, as 
a thing meritorious in itself. The mar­
ginal annotator of the Latin, a little 
further on, calls attention to the point 
as one deserving careful considera­
tion. 
1 See note above, p. And they beleue that by mans reason none 
can be fownde trewer then this, onles annye godlyer be 
inspyred into man from heauen. Wherin whether they 
belyue well or no, nother the tyrne clothe suffer us to 
discusse, nother it ys nowe necessarye. For we haue 
taken vpbn vs to shewe and declare theyr ]ores and orde­
naunces, and not to defende them 1• 
But thys thynge I beleue verely: howe soeuer thies 
decrees be, that their is in no place of the wordle nother 
a more excellent people, nother a more flouryshynge 
commen wealthe. They be lyghte and quycke of boddy, 
full of actiuity and nymblenes, and of more strengthe then 
a man wold iudge them by theyre stature, whyche for 
all that ys not to lowe. And thoughe theyre soyle be 
not verye frutefull, nor theyre ayer verye holsome, yet 
agaynste the ayer they soo defende them wyth temperate 
dyete, and soo order and husbande theyr grounde wyth 
dylygente trauayle, that in no contreye ys greatter in­
crease, and plentye of corne and cattell, nor mens bodies 
of longer liffe, and subiect or apte to fewer deseases. 
sint usquequaque fertili, nee admodum salubri caelo, 
aduersus aerem ita sese temperantia uictus muniunt, terrae sic 
medentur industria, ut nusquam gentium sit frugis pecorisque pro­
uentus uberior, aut hominum uiuaciora corpora, paucioribusque 
1 This deserves notice, u indicating 
the author's own view of his freedom 
from responsibility, u a narrator only, and not an advocate. 
• A • genitivus qualitatis siN epi­
theto.' 
P2 
212 Qe seconn 15oke (Ca. 
There, therfore, a man maye see· well and diligentlye 
exploited and furnished, not onlye those thinges whiche 
husbandmen doo commenly in other countreys; as by 
craft and cunning to remedy the barrennes of the grounde; 
but also a hole wood by the handes of the people plucked 
vp by the rotes in one place and sett agayne in· an other 
place 1• Wherin was hadde regard and consideration not 
of plenty but of commodious carriage ; that wood and 
tymber might be nigher to the sea, or the riuers, or the 
c1t1es. For it is lesse laboure and busines to carrye 
grayne farre by Iande then wood. The people be gentle, 
merye, quycke, and fyne wytted, delytynge in quyetnes, 
and, when nede requyreth, able to abyde and suffre muche 
bodelye laboure. Elles they be not greatelye desyerous 
and fonde of yt ; but in the exercyse and studdye of the 
mynde they be neuer werye. 
When they had harde me speake of the Greke 2 lytter-
morbis obnoxia. 
Qui quum a nobis accepissent de literis et disciplina Graecorum 
1 The reader will be reminded of 
Milton's description :-
• They pluck'd the seated hills with 
all their load,' &c., 
and what critics call the • magnifica 
imago' of Claudian : GigaHiomadri"a, 
66sqq. 
1 More's fondness for the Greek 
language, and his proficiency in it, 
have been spoken of in the lntroduc· 
tion. In this respect the friends of enlightenment could claim him as one 
of themselves. Nothmg can show 
better the wide difference between his 
standpoint and that of a defender of 
things as they were, like Alberto Pio, 
Count ofCarpi,than the way in which 
they respectively treat the claims of 
Greek to recognition. More, arguing 
against Dorp, insists that it contains 
the most precious treasures of all. 
' Quis nesciat,' he asks, • Graecam esse 
cu. 213 
arature • or learnynge (for in Latyne theyre was nothynge 
that I thougthe they wolde greatelye allowe, besydes 
hystoryens and Poetes), they made wonderfull earneste 
and importunate sute vnto me, that I wolde teache and 
instructe them in that tonge and learnynge. I beganne 
therefore to reade 1 vnto them; at the fyrste, truelye, more 
bycause I wolde not seme to refuse the laboure, then that 
I hooped that they wolde annye thyng proffytte therin. 
But when I had gone forwarde a lytle, and b perceaued 
incontynente by theyr dylygence that my labour should 
not be bestowed in vayne; for they beganne so easelye 
to fassyon theyre letters, so plainly to pronounce the 
woordes, so quyckely to learne by harte, and so suerly 
a sic. 
eam quae summopere sit cum ab uni­
uersis mortalibus, tum uero seorsum 
a Christianis amplectenda, utpote 
a qua et omnes disciplinae reliquae, 
et Nouum Testamentum fere totum 
nobis foelicissime succ:essit.' He urges 
Dorp, even though late in the day, 
to learn it. 
Alberto Pio, on the other hand, re­
butting the attacks of Erasmus, the 
champion of boluu liln'tll, wishes de­
voutly that those boluu lilnw had 
never found their way across the Alps. hgwrr, the tec:hnic:al term for 
oral instruction. 
1 lDis was the regular term for the 
214 (Cu. VI, 
to rehearse the same, that . I marueled at it ; sauynge that 
the most parte of them were fyne and chosen wittes, and 
of rype age, pyked oute of the companye of the learned 
men, whyche not onlye of theyr owne faee • and volun­
tarye wyll, but also by the commaundemente of the 
cowncell, vndertoke to learne thys langage. Therfore 
in lesse than iii. yeres space their was nothing in the 
Greke tonge that they lackede. They were able to reade 
good authors wythout anny staye, if the booke were not 
false 1• 
Thys kynde of learnynge, as I suppose, they toke so 
muche the souner, bycause it is sumwhat allyaunte to 
them. For I thynke that thys nation tooke their begin­
ninge of the Grekes, bycause their speche, which in all 
other poyntes is not muche vnlyke the persian tonge 2, 
kepeth dyuers signes and tookens of the greke langage in 
the names of their cityes and of theire magystrates. They 
haue of me (for, when I was determyned to entre into my 
• Misprmt for free. Habent ex me (nam librorum sarcinam 
scholar's rrj¥lilio11 of what be had 
learnt by heart. So in Lily's Carmm 
tie mori1nls :-
• Incumbens studio, submissa uoce 
Ioqueris; 
Nobis dum reddis, uoce canorus 
eris. Burnet avoids the clause. 
' See note above, p. 
CH. VI.] Of Utopia. voyage t, I caste into the shippe in the steade of mar· 
chandyse a pretye fardell of bookes, bycause I intended to 
come agayne rather neuer than shortelye) the.. mooste 
parte of Platoes woorkes ; more of Aristotles ; also Theo­
phrastus 2 of Plantes, but in diuers places (which I am 
sorye for) vnperfecte. For whyles wee were saylynge b' 
a mormosett chaunced vpon the booke, as yt was negly­
gentlye layde by; whyche, wantonlye playinge therewyth, 
plucked owte certeyne leaues, and toore them in pieces 3• 
Of them that haue wrytten the grammer, they haue onelye 
Lascaris •. For Theodorus I caried not wyth me; nor 
• they haue, I saye, of me the. 11 a shipborde. Ex 
Il7 hiis qui scripsere grammati:cam, Lascarem habent tantum; Theodo-
1 See the Introduction, p. 
1 The works of Theophrastus had 
been published at Venice, in 1497. 
Why More should give so prominent 
a place to this treatise, as to mention 
it next after Plato and Aristotle, is 
uncertain. It may have been a favourite 
of his own, or one which seemed a 
natural companion for a traveller in 
foreign lands. Theophrastus was often 
included in the same edition with 
Aristotle, as in the great Venice edition 
of 1493-8. 
• Besides the Rabelaisian 'lmlisnft. 
6/a•a which this little touch gives to 
the description, there is no doubt that 
More is calling up some actual remi­
niscence of the tricks of his own pet 
monkey. This animal, more famous 
than the one which is said to. have 
carried the infant Cromwell up in its paws to the roof of the house, is 
immortalized in Erasmus's Colloquy 
Amicili-.. and has its place in Holbein's 
picture of the household of Sir Thomas 
More. 
1 The first edition of the Grammatico 
Gn~~ea of Constantine Lascaris ap­
peared at Milan in 1476, after which 
editions appeared frequently. Theo­
dore Gaza's /nlrociNdiNal Grammalias 
Lihri iv., mentioned just afterwards, 
first appeared from the press of Aldus 
in 1495. Gaza's work was recognized 
by competent judges ' as superior to 
all other manuals of the kind.' Budaeus 
• praised it as a masterpiece of the 
grammarian's art.' Erasmus translated 
it to his class at Camblidge, and 
Richard Croke to his class at Leipsic. 
-See Mullinger's u,;v.-sily of Cam­
~,i.p.430· 
-.I 
2I6 [Ca. 
neuer a dyctyonarye, but Hesichius 1 and Dioscorides. 
They sett greate stoore by Plutarches bookes. And they 
be delyted wyth Lucianes merye conceytes and iestes. 
Of the Poettes they haue Aristophanes, Homer, Euripides, 
and Sophocles in Aldus small prynte. Of the Historyans 
they haue Thucidides, Herodotus, and Herodian. Also 
my companion, Tricius Apinatus 2, caried with him phisick 
hokes, certein smal woorkes of Hippocrates, and Galenes 
rum enim non aduexi mecum, nee dictionarium 1 aliquem praeter 
Hesychium ac Dioscoridem. Ex poetis habent 
Aristophanem, Homerum atque Euripidem, tum Sophoclem minus­
culis Aldi formulis; ex historicis Thucydidem atque Herodotum, 
necnon Herodianum. Quin in re medica quoque sodalis meus Tricius 
Apinatus aduexerat secum parua quaedam Hippocratis opuscula, ac 
1 The Glossarium Gran:um of Hesy­
chius had only recently been issued 
from the press when More wrote; the 
first edition being that brought out 
under the care of Musurus at Venice, 
in 1514. Pedanius Dioscorides, of 
Anazarbus near Tarsus, was a medical 
writer in the time of Nero. Vives, in 
his IN trru/mr/U discipliHis (ed. 553), mentions his IN Hn'flis as a 
treatise to be studied, along with 
Theophrastus's Ik &h"rpibus, named by 
More just above. The works of Dios­
corides had been printed at Venice 
in 1499· 
No special notice is needed of the 
eommon authors that are next men­
tioned in the text, who, as it will be 
observed, are all Greek. It may be 
remarked, however, that Herodian 
was a very favourite author after the 
revival of letters. He and Sallust 
are among those most frequently pre­
scribed in the statutes of early grammar 
schools in this country. 530) says that the student • ad 
historism praeleget Hworiia"""'• ut 
cum versione conferat Angeli Politiani. Est author ille candidus ex se ac facilis; 
sed ea gratia Politianus transtulit, ut 
non ab homine Graeco videatur genitus 
sed a Latino.' 
1 This is a name evidently formed 
from the • apinae tricaeque' of .Martial, 
xiv. I, g: 
• Quaecumque lusi juvenis et puer 
quondam, 
Apinasque nostras;' 
lines which More may often have had 
in his mind, as reflecting youthful 
occupations of his own. Perotti in his 
ComiiCOjJUM, 1513, col. 466, gives the 
explanation of the phrase. Apina and 
Trica, he says, were two small towns 
in Apulia, captured (according to Pliny) 
by Diomede ; the names of which 
passed into a proverb for anything 
trivial-mere bagatelles. Much to the 
same effect Erasmus in his .A.dagia, 
I~,p. 134· 
1 A late Latin word for glossarillm, 
though that is not much better. VI,] of Utopia. 
Microtechne 1 : the whyche boke they haue in greate esty­
matyon. For thoughe there be almost no nation vnder 
heauen that hath lesse nede of Phisick 2 then they, yet, this 
notwithstandyng, Phisicke is no where in greater honour ; 
bycause they courtt the knowledge of yt emonge the good· 
lieste, and mooste profytable partes of Philosophie. For 
whyles they by the helpe of thys Philosophie searche owte 
the secrete mysteryes of nature, they thynke that they not 
onlye receaue therby" wonderfull greate pleasur, but also " 
obteyn great thankes and fauour of the auctoure and 
maker therof. Whome they thynke, accordynge to the 
• [that .•. therby] themselfes to receaue therby not onlye. 
"also to. 
1 No collected edition of Galen's 
works in Greek had appeared at the 
time when More wrote; the earliest 
being that of Aldus at Venice, in 1525. 
But separate treatises had been already 
published, as the Thrmpnllietn'J4m 
Libri xiv, in 1500. The Microt#t:hnr, 
'Little art,' was a name given to 
Galen's TIXJ'fl laTptq, which, as 
Donaldson says, 'was the text-book 
and chief subject of examination for 
medical students in the middle ages, 
when it was known in barbarous Latin 
as the Trgn11m or Microl'lf"NIH (Micro­
l«hnum) of Galen'- Lillnltun of 
Ancincl Gn«e (18s8), ii. 1174· This 
was in contradistinction to the Jlrgalo-t•gnum, or 8rpa1miT&qr ~ /J&/iJAla 
all'. 
1 By ' Phisicke' here is meant medi­
cine, not physical science, as seen by 
the Latin. But in what follows More 
is plainly thinking of physical, or 
natural, science in general. lu3 a con· 
trast to the picture he draws, may be 
compared the description of Erasmus, 
in lVhich the medical practitioner alone 
thrives, while the professors of other 
sciences starve :-• Esuriunt theologi, 
frigent physici, ridentur astrologi, neg· 
liguntur dialectici; solus laTp<)r cl...)p 
110M;, dnd£10r IAMN.' Er~CrJ~Hium 
JloriM, ed. 
fassyon of other artyfycers, to haue sett furthe the mar­
uelous and gorgious frame of the worlde for man to " 
beholde; whome onelye he bathe made of wytte and 
capacytye to consydre and vnderstand the excellencye of 
so greate a woorke. And therefore, saye they, dothe 
he beare b more' good wyll and loue to t~e curyous and 
diligent beholder and vewere of his woorke, and mar­
uelour at the same, then he doth to him, whyche lyke 
a very beaste o wythowte wytte and reason, or as one 
wythowte sense or mouynge, hath no regarde to soo greate 
and soo wonderfull a spectacle 1• 
The wyttes therefore of the Vtopians, inurede and exer­
cysed in learnynge, be maruelous quycke in the inuentyon 
of feates, helpynge annye thynge to the aduantage and 
wealthe of lyffe. feates theye maye thanke 
vs for; that is, the scyence of imprintyng, and the crafte 
of makynge paper: and yet not onelye vs but chyefelye 
and pryncypallye themselfes. For when wee shewede to 
them Aldus 11 hys prynte in bookes of paper, and told them 
• with great affeccion intentiuely to. 
11 [saye •.• beare] he beareth (say they). • brute beast. John aptly compares with 
this the fine passage in Cicero, /h 
N•t. U 37, 38, in which, 
after translating from Aristotle, he 
continues, in a similar strain to More: 
' Licet enim . oculis quodammodo contemplari pulchritudinem earum 
rerum, quas divina providentia dicimus 
constitutas.' 
1 The recent death of Aldus Ma· 
nutius the elder, in April 1515, was 
probably fresh in More ·s recollection I 
I 
CR. 219 
of the stuffe wher of paper is made, and of the feat of 
grauynge letters, speakynge sumwhat more 1 then wee 
colde playnlye declare (for there was none of vs that 
knewe perfectlye other the one or the other), they furth­
wyth verye wyttelye coniectured the thynge. And where 
as before they wrote onelye in skynnes, in barkes of tryes, 
and in rides 1, now they haue attempted to make paper 
and to imprint letters. And thoughe at the fyrste yt 
proued not all of the beste, yet by often assayinge the 
same they shortelye gott the feate of bothe ; and haue so 
broughte the matter abowte, that yf they had copyes of 
Greeke authores, they coulde lacke no bookes. But 
nowe they haue no moore then I rehearsed before ; 
sauynge that by pryntynge of bookes they haue multy­
plyed and increased the same into manye thowsande of 
copyes. 
Who soeuer cummeth thether to see the Iande, beynge 
excellente in annye gyfte of wytte, or throughe muche and 
Ionge iournyenge well experiensed and sene in the know-
chartae faciendae materia, ac literas imprimendi facultate loqueremur 
aliquid magis quam explicaremus (neque enim quisquam erat nostrum 
qui alterutram calleret), ipsi statim acutissime coniecerunt rem ; et 
quum ante pellibus, corticibus, ac papyro tantum scriberent, iam 
chartam ilico facere et literas imprimere tentarunt : quae quum primo 
non satis procederent, eadem saepius experiendo breui sunt utrum­
que consecuti ; tantumque effecerunt, ut, si essent Graecorum 
exemplaria librorum, codices deesse non possent. 
Quisquis eo spectandi gratia uenerit, quem insignis aliqua dos 
ingenii, aut longa peregrinatione usum multarum cognitio terrarum 
when he wrote this.-See Renouard, 
A""al'& rk flmpn"miiV au A Irk, rBoa, 
i. 
1 If this were the meaning, it would 
be a genuine touch of human nature-ignorance seeking to veil itself under 
a cloud of words. But the Latin 
simply means • talking something about 
it, rather than explaining.' 
• That is, reeds, such as the papyrus. 
220 [CH. 
ledge of manye countreys (for the whyche cause wee were 
verye welcome to them), hym they receyue and interteyne 
wonders gentyllye and louynglye ; for they haue delyte to 
heare what ys done in euerye Iande. Howebeyt, verye 
few marchaunte men come thythere. For what shoulde 
they brynge thither? onles yt were Iron, or els golde and 
syluer; whiche they hadde rathere carrye home agayne. 
Also suche thynges as arre to be caryed owte of their 
Iande, they thynke yt more wysedome to carrye that geer 
furthe themselfes, then that othere shoulde come thether 
to fetche yt 1 ; to thentente they maye the better knowe the 
owte Iandes of euerye syde • them, and kepe in vre 2 the 
feat and knouledge of saylinge. 
1 That is, the Utopians prefer to ship their exports in their own bottoms., 
rather than wait for foreigners to come and take them. See the Glossary. 
men, sicke persons, wedlocke, and dy­
uers other matters. 221 
THey nother make bondemen of prysoners taken in 
battayll, oneles yt be in battaylle that the fowghte 
themselfes, nor• bondemens chyldren, nor, to be shorte b, 
annye man whome0 they canoe gette _owte of an othere 
countreye d, thoughe he were theyre a bondeman ; but 
other suche as amonge themseifes for heynous offences be 
punnyshed wyth bondage, or elles suche as in the Cytyes 
of other landes for greate trespasses be condempned to 
deathe 1• And of thys sorte of bondemen they haue 
mooste stoore. For manye of them they brynge home, 
sumtymes payinge very lytle for them ; yea, mooste com­
monlye gettynge them for gramercye 2• Thyes sortes 
of bondemen they kepe not onelye in contynuall woorke 
• nor of. b shorte of. • annye suche as. 
c1 forreine countries. 
1 That is, gratuitously. See the Glossary. 
and laboure, but alsoo in bandes. But theyre owne men 
they handle hardeste, whome they judge more desperate, 
and to haue deseruede greater punnysshemente; bycause 
they, beynge so godlye broughte vp to vertue, in soo 
excellente a common wealthe, cowlde not for all that 
be refreyned from mysdoynge. 
An other kynde of bondemen they haue, when a vyle 
drudge, beynge a poore laborer in an other cowntreye, 
clothe chewse of hys owne free wyll to be a bondeman 
amonge them. Thyes they handle• and order honestelye, 
and enterteyne almooste·as gentyllye, as theyre owne free 
cytyzeyns ; sauynge that they put them to a lytle more 
laboure, as theret~ accustomede. Yf annye suche be dys· 
posed to departe thens (whyche seldome ys seene) they 
nother holde hym agaynste hys wyll, nother sende hynt 
awaye wyth emptye handes. 
The sycke (as I sayde 1} they see to wyth greate affec­
tyon, and lette nothynge at all passe, concernynge other 
Physycke or good dyete, wherby they may be restored 
agayne to theyre healthe. Them that be sycke of in­
curable dyseases they comforte wyth syttynge by them, 
• intreate. VII.) Of Utopia. 223 
wyth talkynge wyth them, and, to be shorte, wyth all 
maner of helpes that maye be. But yf the dysease be not 
onelye vncurable, but also full of contynuall payne and 
anguyshe, then the priestes and the magistrates exhort the 
man, seynge he ys not able to doo annye dewtye of lyffe, 
and by ouerlyuing hys owne deathe is noysome and yrke­
soll!e to other, and greuous to hymself; that he wyll 
determyne with hymselfe no longer to cheryshe that 
pestilent and peynefull dysease: and, seynge hys lyfe ys 
to hym but a tourmente, that he wyll nott bee vnwyllynge 
too dye, but rather take a good hope to hym, and other 
dyspatche hymselfe owte of that paynfulllyffe, as owte of 
a pryson or a racke of tormente, or elles suffer hym selfe 
wyllynglye to be rydde owte of yt by other 1• And in so 
doynge they tell hym he shal doo wyselye, seynge by hys 
deathe he shall lyse no commodytye, but ende hys payne. hoc ilium, quum non commoda sed supplicium abrupturus 
1 The words of More to his daughter 
Margaret, when in the Tower: • I be· 
lieve, Meg, that they that have put me 
here ween that they have done me a 
high displeasure: but I assure thee on 
my faith, mine own r;ood daughter, if 
it had not been for my wife and ye 
that be my children, I would not have 
flliled long ere this to have closed 
myself in as strait a room, and straiter 
too,' were taken by Warner to imply 
that he would have been prepared, 
under certain circumstances, to carry 
out the recommendation in the tut. The true reference, however, can only 
be, as Father Bridgett points out (Lij1, 
pp. 25, 367) to the cell of a Carthusian 
monastery. A similar misinterpreta­
tion of the 'lowly bed ' of Gray's Ekgy 
is sometimes met with. It must be 
admitted, in Warner's defence, that 
the stoical doctrine of suicide, under 
certain limitations. is here presented 
in as attractive a form as it well could 
be. For the Christian view of the 
subject, see the authorities collected 
by Bishop Wordsworth in his note on 
Acts xvi. 
And bycause in that acte he shall followe the cownsell of 
the pryestes, that is to saye of the interpreters of goddes 
wyll and pleasure, they shewe hym that he shall do lyke 
a godly and a vertuouse man. They that be thus per­
suaded fynyshe theyre lyues wyllynglye, othere wyth 
hunger, or elles dye in theyre sleape 1 wythowte annye 
fealnige of deathe. But they cause none suche to ~dye 
agaynste hys wyll; nor they vse no lesse dilygence and 
attendaunce about hym; beleuynge 2 thys to be an honor­
able deathe. Elles he that kylleth hym selfe before that 
the pryestes and the cownsell haue allowed the cause of 
hys deathe, hym, as vnworthy both of the earth and of 
fyer•, they cast vnburied into some stinkyng marrish. 
The woman is not maried before she be xviii. The man is b iiii. yeres elder before he mary 3• If 
other the man or the woman be proued to haue bodely 0 
offended, before their marriage, with an other', he or she 
.. [both ••. fyer] either to be buryed, or with fier to be consumed. 
b is omitted. aut foemina si conuincatur furtiuae libidinis, grauiter 
1 This would rather suggest a natural 
death. But the Latin, sopili, implies 
that they would be sent to sleep, or, 
as Burnet plainly words it, • take 
Opium.' 
I Robynson apparently took pw. 
&JUISOS as if f'n'sNIISi, and connected 
it with the preceding clause. It is literally : ' for men to die in this way 
upon persuasion (that is, convinced by 
proper authority) is honourable.' 
1 Compare the remarks on pre­
mature marriages in the Introduction, 
p.xxxiii. 
• This is an uncalled for addition 
by the translator. 225 
whether it be • is sharpely punyshed ; and both the offen­
ders be forbydden euer after in all their lyfe to marrye, 
oneles the faulte be forgeuen by the princes pardone. 
But bothe the good man and the good wyfe of the house 
where that offence was done b, as beyng slacke and neg­
lygent in lokyng to there chardge, be in daunger of great 
reproche and infamye. That offence is so sharpelye 
punyshed, bicause they perce:1ue, that onles they be 
diligentlye kept from the lybertie of this ·vice, fewe wyll 
ioyne together in the loue of marriage 1 ; wherin all the 
lyfe must be led with one, and also all the griefes and 
displeasures that come c therewith must paciently be taken 
and borne. 
Furthermore, in cheusyng wyfes and husbandes they 
obserue earnestly and straytelye a custome whiche"semed 
to vs very fonde and folysh. For a sad and an honest 
matrone sheweth the woman, be she maide or widdowe, 
naked to the wower. And lykewyse a sage and discrete 
man exhibyteth the wowere naked to the woman. At 
• [he or ... be] the partye that so bathe trespac:ed. • c:omming. Hunc 
• Sic 'liam A.; B. 
1 This argument is enforced by 
Paley: Moral P/,7osoplty, Bk. 
The Utopian communism, unlike 
Q Plato"s, did not extend to community 
of wives. 
• Should be cot~l,samt. 
thi~ custome we laughed and disalowed it as foolyshe 1• 
But they on the other part doo greatlye wonder at the 
follye of all other nations, whyche in byinge a colte, where 
as a lytle money is in hassarde, be so charye and circum­
specte, that though he be almoste all bare, yet they wyll 
not bye hym, oneles the saddel and all the harneys be 
taken of, leaste vnder those couerynges be hydde som 
galle or soore; and yet in chewsynge a wyfe, whyche 
shalbe other pleasure or dyspleasure to them all theire 
lyfe after, they be so recbeles, that, all the resydewe of 
the wooman's bodye beinge couered wyth cloothes, they 
esteme here scaselye be one handebredeth (for they can se 
no more but her face); and so do• ioyne her to them not 
without great ieoperdie of euell agreing together, if any 
thynge in her body afterwarde do offende b and myslyke 
them. For all men be not so wyse as to haue respecte to 
the vertuous condicions of the partie ; and the endow­
mentes of the bodye cause the vertues of the mynde more 
• to. b should chaunce to offende. Nam neque omnes tam sapientes sunt ut solos 
mores respiciant, et in ipsorum quoque I sapientum coniugiis ad I23 
1 Burton, in his Anatomy of M1lan• 
choly (Part III, sec. 
a), quotes this fancy of More's, and 
compares it with one of the institu­
tions of Lycurgus (Plutarch's Liuu, tr. by the Langhomes, 18os, i. 
Bacon, in his Nm~ Atlantis (ed. by 
St. John, p. a48), also refers to it, 
and devises what be thinks a better 
expedient. 
CR, VII.) Of Utopia. 
to be estemed and regarded, yea, euen in the mariages of 
wyse men. Verely so fowle deformitie may be hydde 
vnder thoes coueringes, that it maye quite alienate and 
take awaye the mans mynde from his wyfe, when it shal 
not be lawfull for their bodies to be seperate agayne. If 
suche deformitie happen by any chaunce after the mariage 
is consumate and finyshed ; well, there is no remedie 
but patience. Euery man must take his fortune, well 
a worthe .1 But it were well done that a lawe were made, 
wherebye all suche deceytes myghte be eschewed and 
aduoyded before hand. And thys were they constreyned 
more earnestlye to looke vpon, because they onlye of the 
nations in that parte of the worlde bee contente euerye 
man wyth one wyfe a piece; and matrymoney is there 
neuer broken, but by death ; excepte adulterye breake t,he 
bonde, or els the intollerable waiward maners of eyther 
partie. For if either of them fynde themselfe for any 
suche cause greued ; they maye by the licence of the 
councell chaunge and take an other. But the other partie 
lyueth euer after in infamye. and out of wedlocke. 
1 There is nothing in the Latin to 
show in what sense this exclamation 
was meant to be used. On the analogy • om. 
of 'wellaway,' and • woe w<>rth,' it 
will be an exclamation of sorrow: 
• alas ! that it should be so.' 
Q2 
228 [Cx, VII. 
for the • husbande to put away his wyfe for nob faulte, but 
for that some myshappe is fallen to her bodye, thys by no 
meanes they wyll suffre. For they iudge it a greate 
poynte of crueltie that any body in their moste nede of 
helpe and comforte, shoulde be cast of and forsaken ; and 
that olde age, whych both bryngeth sycknes with it, and 
is a syckenes it selfe t, should vnkyndlye and vnfaythfullye 
be delte withall. But nowe and then it chaunseth, where 
as the man and the woman cannot well agree betwene 
themselfes, bothe of them fyndynge other with whome 
they hope to lyue more quyetlye and meryly, that they by 
the full consent of them both be diuorsed a sonder and 
newe maried to other 2; but that not without the auctho­
ritie of the councell ; which agreeth to no dyuorses, before 
they and their wyfes haue diligently tried and examyned 
the matter. Yea and then also they be loth to consent to 
• Howbeit the. " no other. Imo ne sic quidem facile, quod rem minime 
1 The thought is from Terence, 
Phurmio, iv. Rogas! 
Snttelfls ipsa 'sl morilt~s.' 
1 Milton contended in earnest for 
what More here makes the Utopians 
allow, protesting vehemently against 
the law which continued to bind 
together a married couple, although 
• through their different tempers, 
thoughts, and coustitutions, they can 
Aeither be to one another a remedy against loneliness, nor live in any 
union or contentment all their days.' 
He is careful to guard against its being 
thought • that licence, and levity, and 
unconsented breach of faith should 
herein be countenanced ; but that 
some consciouable and tender pity 
might be had of "those who have un· 
warily, in a thing they never practised 
before, made themselves the bondmen 
of a luckless and helpless matrimony.' 
See the Preface to TIN Doctn·,. tmd 
Discipli11• of Divora. 229 
it, bicause they knowe thys to be the nexte waye to breke 
loue betwene man and wyfe, to be in easye hope of 
a newe mariage. 
Breakers of wedlocke be punyshed with moste greuous 
bondage. And if both the offenders were maried, then 
the partyes whiche in that behalfe haue suffered wronge 
be diuorsed from the auoutrers if they wyll, and be 
maried together•, or els to whom they luste. But if 
eyther of them both do styli contynewe in loue towarde 
so vnkynde a bedfellowe, the vse of wedlocke is not to 
them forbydden, if the partie b be disposed to followe in 
toylinge and drudgerye the person, which for that offence 
is condempned to bondage. And very ofte 1 it chaunceth 
that the repentaunce of the one, and the earnest diligence 
of the other, clothe so moue the prince with pytie and 
compassion, that he restoreth the bonde persone from 
seruitude to libertie and fredom again. But if the same 
partie be taken eftsones in that faulte, there is no other 
way but death. 
To other trespaces there isc no prescript punyshment 
appoynted by anye lawe. But accordinge to the hey-
• [be diuoned •.. together] beinge diuorsed from the auoutren, be maried 
together, if they will. • [there is no] no . 
Caeteris facinoribus nullam certam poenam lex ulla praestituit, 
I LaL '"''"'""'• not so much as ' very ofte ; ' but rather, ' now and then.' 
-
230 (CH. 
nousenes of the offence, or contrarye, so the punyshe­
mente is moderated by the discretion of the councell. 
The husbandes chastice theire wyfes 1; and the parentes 
theire chyldren; oneles they haue done anye so horryble 
an offence, that the open punyshemente thereof maketh 
muche for the aduauncemente of honeste maners. But 
moste commenlye the moste heynous faultes be punyshed 
with the incommoditie of bondage. For that they suppose 
to be to the offenders no lesse griefe, and to the common 
wealth more profitable •, then if they should hastely put 
them to death, and make them b out of the waye. For 
there cummeth more profite of theire laboure, then of 
theire deathe; and by theire example they feare other the 
Ienger from lyke offences. But if they, beinge thus vsed, 
doo rebell and kicke agayne, then forsothe they be slayne 
as desperace o and wilde beastes, whom nother pryson nor 
chayne could restraine and kepe vnder. But they whiche 
take theire bondage patientlye be not left all hopeles. 
For after they haue bene broken and tamed with Ionge 
• profit. • and so make them quite. 
quippe longis domiti 1 malis si eam poenitentiam prae se ferant, quae 134 
1 In England it was long supposed 
to be the law that a man might chastise 
his wife, so it be in moderation, and 
with a stick no thicker than his thumb. But 'modern law recog-nizes no such right, and a husband is 
not justified in beating his wife, even 
though she be drunk or insolent.' See 
TM ,A,riam -« Ertglislo Encyc/o• 
jitmii. of L .. 815, 
and the authorilies there quoted. 
CH. 231 
myseries, yf then they shewe suche repentaunce, where· 
bye • it maye be perceaued that they be soryer for the ire 
offence then for theire punyshemente, sumtymes by the 
Prynces prerogatyue, and sumtymes by the voyce and 
consent of the people, theire bondage other is mitigated, or 
els deane remytted and forgeuen 1• He that moueth to 1 
aduoutrye is in no lesse daunger and ieoperdie, then yf he 
hadde committed aduoutrye in dede. For in aU offences 
they counte the intente and pretensed purpose as euell as 
the acte or dede it selfe 8• For they thynke b that no Iette 
owghte to excuse hym, that dyd hys beste too haue no Jette. 
They sette greate store by o fooles '· And as it is d 
greate reproche to do to • annye of them hurte or iniury, 
so they prohibite not to take pleasure of foolyshnes. For 
that, they thynke, doth muche good to the fooles. And 
if any man be so sadde and sterne, that he cannot laughe 
nother at their wordes nor at their dedes, none of them 
• as therebye. 
• [sette ••• by] haue singular delite and pleasure in. 
1 Not in the sense ofinciting others 
to, but of attempting. 
' The reader will at once recall 
More's own fancy for a HICiriO, in the 
person of Henry Pattinson, who is 
introduced into Holbein's sketch of the family of Sir Thomas More. 
• CuiN.S appears to refer, by a 
rather harsh change of number, to 
morioJtis, supplied from the preceding 
moriombru. 
be commytted to his tuition ; for feare lest he would not 
ordre • them gentilly and fauorably enough, to whom 
they should brynge no delectation (for other goodnes in 
them is none); muche lesse any proffyt shoulde they 
yelde hym. 
To mocke a man for hys deformitie, or for that he 
lacketh anye parte or lymme of hys bodye, is counted 
greate dishonestie and reproche, not to hym that is 
mocked, but to hym that mocketh 1 ; which vnwysely 
doth imbrayde 2 any man of that as a vice, whiche was 
not in his powre to eschewe. Also as they counte and 
reken very lyttell wytte to be in hym that regardeth not 
naturall bewtie and comlines, so to helpe the same with 
payntinges is taken for a vayne and a wanton pryde, not 
without great infamye 11• For they knowe euen by verye 
experience, that no comelines of bewtie doth so hyghly 
commende and auaunce the wyues in -the conceyte of 
there husbandes, as honest conditions and lowlines. For 
as loue is oftentimes wonne with bewtie, so it is not kept, 
preserued, and continued 4, but by vertue and obedience. 
• intr-eate. 
1 Such a one as Persius describes: 
... See the Glossary. 
' llore has an epigram • In anum fucis frustra utentem,' ending 'num• 
quam Hecuben haec facient Helenen.' 
• All this is for rdiMtur. For the sen­
timent, compare More's charming lines 
CR. 233 
They do not only feare theire people from doinge euell 
by punyshmentes, but also allure them to vertue with 
rewardes of honoure. Therfore they set vp in the market 
place the ymages of notable men t, and of such as haue 
bene great and bounteful benefactors to the common 
wealth, for the perpetual memorie of their good actes ; 
and also that the glory and renowme of the auncetors 
may sturre and prouoke theire posteritie to vertue. He 
that inordinatlie and ambitiously desireth promotions, is 
lefte all hopeles for euer atteynyng any promotion as 
Ionge as he liueth. They lyue together louingly. For 
no magistrate is other hawte or ferefull. Fathers they 
be called, and lyke fathers they vse themselfes. The 
citezens (as it is their aewtie) do. willingly exhibite vnto 
them dewe honoure, without any compulsion. Nor the 
prince hymselfe is not knowen from the other by his 
apparel, nor by a crown or diademe b or cappe of main-
• do omi/1«1. " (by his .•. diademe 1 by princely apparel. or a robe of 
state, nor by a crown or diademe roial. Ne principem quidem ipsum uestis aut diadema, sed 
• Ad Candidum: qualis a:r.or deligenda.' 
• That is true love,' he says, ' which 
Virtutis inclytae 
{Quae certa permaneos 
Non febre decidit, 
Annisue deperit) 
Respectus elicit.' 1 The • image' of More himself has 
of late years been so set up in his 
native city, though not yet in a manner 
worthy of him. See the Introduction, 
p. 
' An ellipse of 111. 
234 [CR. 
tenaunce 1, but by a Iittell sheffe of come caried before 
hym. And so a taper of wax is borne befor the byshop 2, 
whereby onely he is knowen. 
Thei haue but few Iawes. For to people so instructe 
and institute very fewe do suffice. Yea this thynge they 
chieflye reproue amonge other nations, that innumerable 
hokes of Iawes and expositions vpon the same be not 
sufficient 1• But they thinke it against al right and iustice, 
that men shuld be bound to thoes Iawes, whiche other be 
in numbre mo then be able to be readde, or els blinder 
and darker, then that any man can well vnderstande them. 
Furthermore they vtterly exclude and bannyshe all• proc­
tours and sergeauntes at the lawe 4, which craftely han dell 
matters, and subtelly dispute of the Iawes. For they 
• all attomeis. porro causidicos, qui causas tractent callide ac leges uafre 
1 The 'cap of maintenance,' or ' cap 
of dignity,· was a cap of crimson 
velvet, lined with ermine, originally 
assigned only to dukes. The name is 
said to be derived from its having been 
' borne in the hand ' by a distinguished 
captive, in the train of the victorious 
general who owned it. See the Dic· 
tionaries. In the Latin text. however, 
there is nothing but tlit.ulnHa to answer 
to Robynson's triplet. 
1 See below, p. 1194-
1 This is a stock complaint. The 
jurisconsults have their share in the PraiM of Folly, as those who ' sex­
centas leges eodem spiritu contexunt, 
nihil refert quam ad rem pcrtinentes ; ' 
and who • glossematis glossemata, 
opiniones opinionibus cumulantes, 
elliciunt ut studium illud omnium 
dillicillimum esse videatur.'- Moritu 
EIICOIH., ed. 
• This is Robynson's expansion of 
the single term csiiSitiiDo8. ' Proctor ' 
is Chaucer's 'procuratour : '-
• May I not axe a libel, sire sompnour, 
And answer there by my procura­
tour?' \ 
Ca. VII.] of Utopia. 235 
thinke it most mete, that euery man shuld pleade his 
owne matter, and tell the same tale before the iudge, 
that he would tel to his man of lawe. So shall there be 
lesse circumstaunce of wordes, and the trewth shal soner 
cum to light; whiles the iudge with a discrete iudgement 
doth waye the wordes of hym whom no lawier hath in· 
struct with deceit; and whiles he helpeth and beareth 
out simple wittes agaynst the false and malicious circum­
uertions of craftie chyldren 1• This is harde to be ob­
serued in other countreis, in so infinitie a numbre of 
blynd and intricate lawes. But in Vtopia euery man is 
a cunnyng lawier. • For, as I sayde, they haue verye fewe 
lawes; and the playnner and grosser that anye interpre· 
tation is, that they allowe as most iuste. For all lawes 
(saye they) bee made and publysshed onelye to thenthente, 
that by them euerye man shoulde be put in remembraunce 
of hys dewtye. But the craftye and subtyll interpretation 
disputent, prorsus omnes excludunt. 
Nempe quum omnes leges (inquiunt) ea tantum causa promulgentur, 
ut ab hiis quisque sui commonefiat officii, subtilior interpretatio pau-
1-Tbat is, 'people,' as constantly in 
the Bible. More elsewhere 
recommends trusting to the summary 
jurisdiction of a judge. ' Though 
maister More saye, that he neuer saw 
the day yet. but that he durst as well 
trust the truth of one iudge as of two 
iuries,' is a statement in TM lhiN/hlciolt 
of Sal, fllltd BJIR"'"· See also Father Bridgetfs note in W.:WW... and Wit, 
p. 179; and for one cause of the 
corruption of juries, see the Disco11ne 
of t/r, Co,,on W"", before quoted, 
.A.ppmtliz to ],trrJd,ction, p. lix : 
• Somme founde the meanes to haue 
ther seruantes sworne in the J uryes, 
to thyntent to baue them hasarde lher 
soules to saue ther gredynes.' 
trbe seconlJ 15oke (CR. 
of them can • put verye fewe in that remembraunce (for 
they be but fewe that do perceaue them); where as the 
simple, the plaine, and grosse meaning of the lawes is 
open to euerye man. Els as touchynge the vulgare sorte 
of the people, whiche be bothe moste in numbre, and 
haue moste neade to knowe theire dewties, were it not 
as good for them that no lawe were made at all, as, when 
it is made, to brynge so blynde an interpretacion vpon it, 
that without greate witte and longe arguynge no man 
can discusse it? to the findinge out whereof nother the 
grosse iudgement of the people can attayne, nother the 
hole lyfe of them that be occupied in woorkynge for theire 
lyuynges can suffyse therto 1. 
Thies vertues of the Vtopians haue caused theire nexte 
neyghbours and borderers, whiche lyue fre and vnder no 
subiection (for the Vtopians Ionge agoo haue delyuered 
manye of them from tyrannye), to take magistrates of 
them, some for a yeare, and some for fyue yeares space. 
Whiche, when the tyme of theire office is expired, they 
brynge home agayn with honoure and prayse ; and take 
newe ons b agayne wyth them into theire countrey. Thies 
• [them can] them (for as muche as few can atteyne therto) canne. VU.] of lJtopia. 2?-7 
nations haue vndowtedlye verye well and holsomlye pro­
uyded for theire common wealthes. For· seynge that 
bothe the makyng and the marrynge of the weale pub­
lique doth depende and hange of• the maners of the 
rulers and magistrates, what officers coulde they more 
wyselye haue chosen, then thoes whiche cannot be ledde 
from honestye by brybes 1 (for to them that shortlye 
after shall departe thens into theyre owne countreye 
money shoulde be vnprofytable); nor yet be moued other 
with fauour or malyce towardes annye man, as beynge 
straungers and vnaquainted with the people? The which 
twoo vices of affection 2 and auryce where they take place 
in iudgementes, incontynente they breake iustice, the 
strongeste and suereste bonde of a common wealthe 3• 
Thies peoples, whiche fetche theire officers and rulers 
from them, the Vtopians cal theire fellowes; and other, 
to whome they haue bene beneficiall, they call theire 
frendes. 
1 For More's own practice in this 
respect see the anecdotes in Roper's 
Lift (ed. 
1 • Aft'ection' here denotes the ' being 
moved with favour or malice' towards 
anyone, just described; in other words, 
partiality or bias. The Latin a.lf«tu& 
sometimes has the sanfe sense, as in 
QuintiL vi. 2, • inducere iudicem in 
aft'ectus.' Shakspere uses the word 
similarly in .Mn-drtml of Vmit:e, iv. 1 :-'For all'ection, 
Master of passion. sways it to the 
mood 
Of what it likes or lc:>athes.' 
1 The second title of Plato's Rq>ublic, 
it will be remembered, is Conurning 
Juslia. See note above, 
p JJI. 
• Should rather have been Lhe nomi­
native, in apposition to mala. 
As towchynge leages, which in other places betwene 
countrey and countrey be so ofte concluded, broken, and 
made agayne •, they neuer make none with anye nacion 1• 
For to what purpose serue leagues ? saye they; as though 
nature had not set sufficient loue betwene man and man. 
And who so regardeth not nature, thynke yowe that he 
wyll passe for wordes ? They be brought into thys 
opinion chiefely bicause that in thoes parties of the 
wordle leagues betwene princes be wont to be kept and 
obserued very slenderly. For here in Europa, and espe­
ciallye in thies partes, where the faythe and religion of 
Christe reygneth, the maiestie of leagues is euerye where 
estemed holly and inuiolable ; partlye through the iustice 
and goodnes of princes, and partelye through the reue· 
renee of great byshoppes b2• Whyche, lyke as they make 
a renewed. " [through ••. byshoppes] at the reuerence and motion of 
the head byshoppes. 
t Robynson seems to have stuck at 
the words 'mduqu~ fionh'jicum,' as will 
be seen from the reading of his second 
edition, where he evidently took _, 
for motu. In a former passage (sup. 8) he appears in like manner to 
have hesitated about rendering ponli· 
Ji«s by Popes, which is a common 
use of the word in More. So Burnet : 
• Which is partly owing to the Justice and Goodness of the Princes them­
selves, and partly to the Reverence 
they pay to the Popes : Who, as they 
are most religious Observers of their 
own Promises, so they exhort all other 
Princes to perform theirs.' On the 
part taken by Pope Julius II in the 
League of Camhl·ay and afterwards, 
which is probably what More had 
most in view, see Tytler: HisJory of 
Srotlarul, 11164, ii. 281, and Brewer : 
RngH of Hmry VIII, i. 239 
no promysse themselfes, but they doo verye religiouslye 
perfourme the same, so they exhorte all prynces in any 
wyse to abyde by theyre promisses ; and them that refuse 
or denye so to do, by theire pontificall powre and auctho­
rytie they compell therto 1• And surely they thynke well 
that it myght seme a verye reprochefull thynge, yf in the 
leagues of them, whyche by a peculiare name be called 
faythfull, faythe shoulde haue no place. 
But in that newefonnde parte of the worlde, whiche 
is scaselye so farre from vs beyonde the lyne equinoctiall, 
as owre lyfe and manners be dissidente from theirs, no 
truste nor confydence is in leagues. But 2 the mo and 
holyer cerymonies the league is knytte vp with, the soner 
it is broken, by some cauillation founde in the woordes; 
whyche manye tymes of purpose be so craftelye put in 
and placed, that the bandes can neuer be so sure nor 
so stronge, but they wyll fynde some hole open to crepe 
nihil in se recipiunt ipsi, quod non religiosissime praestant, ita caeteros 
omnes principes iubent ut pollicitis omnibus modis immorentur, tergi­
uersantes uero pastorali censura et seueritate compellunt. 
1 With this Slll-castic contrast of 
the ideal with the real. compare the 
strictures of Erasmus, in a similar 
strain, on the conduct of Christian 
Kings and Popes, in his AtlagiG, under 
the headings lmpailia and Simulation 
D~Mimulalio (ed. 301, 655\ 
• This way of beginning a fresh 
sentence dislocates the meaning, by 
appearing to make the conduct here described to be the practice of the U to• 
pians ; as if they broke treaties the 
more quickly, the more solemnly they 
were concluded. Burnet's rendering 
gives what I take to be the same 
wrong impression. The Latin simply 
means: • there is no confidence in 
treaties ; which are speedily broken,'­
that is, which in the old world are so 
broken. 
-
«be seconn 15ofte [Ca. 
owte at 1, and to breake bothe league and trewthe. The 
whiche crafty dealynge, yea, the whiche fraude and de­
ceyte, yf they shoulde knowe it to bee practysed amonge 
pryuate men in theire bargaynes :1nd contractes, they 
woulde incontinent crye owte at it with a • sower coun­
tenaunce, as an offence most detestable, and worthie to be 
punnyshed with a shamefull death; yea, euen verye they2 
that auaunce themselfes authours of like councel geuen to 
princes. Wherfore it maye well be thought other that all 
iustice is but a basse and a lowe vertue, and whiche 
aualeth it self3 farre vnder the hyghe dignitie of kynges ; 
or, at the least wyse, that there be two iustices ; the one 
mete for the inferioure sorte of the people, goinge a fote 
and crepynge by lowe on the 11 grounde, and bounde 
downe on euery side with many bandes, because it shall 
not run at rouers : the other a pryncely vertue, whiche 
lyke as it is of muche hygher maiestie then the other 
poore iustice, so also it is of muche more lybertie, as to 
the whiche nothinge is vnlawful that it lusteth after. 
• with an open mouth and a. b lowe by the. 
1 Here again, Robynson and Burnet 
('but they will find some Loophole,' 
&c.) convey the impression that this 
is what the Utopians do. The meta· 
phor in the I.atin is taken from tying 
up a parcel, which in such hands can never be ItO securely fastened, ' but 
that some things slip out, and baftle 
alike treaty and trust.' 
1 Latin,lri .ps.~ Compare the French 
mimemx. 
1 That is, sinks. See the Glossary. VII.] Of Utopia. 
Thies maners of princes (as I sayde) whiche be there 1 
so euyll kepers of leagues cause the Vtopians, as I sup· 
pose, to make no leagues at all : whiche perchaunce 
woulde chaunge theire mynde if they lyued here. Howe­
beit they thynke that thoughe leagues be neuer so fayth­
fully obserued and kept, yet the custome of makinge 
leagues was verye euel begonne. For this causeth men 
(as though nations which be separate a sondre by the 
space of a lytle hyl or a ryuer, were couplea together by 
no societe or bonde of nature), to thynke them selfes 
borne aduersaryes and enemyes one to an other; and that 
it is • lawfull for the one to seke the death and destruction 
of the other, if leagues were not ; yea, and that, after the 
leagues be accorded, fryndeshyppe dothe not growe and 
en crease ; but the lycence of robbynge and stealynge doth 
styli remayne, as farfurthe as, for lacke of forsight and 
aduisement in writinge the woordes of the league, anny 
sentence or clause to the contrary is not therin suft'y­
cyentlye comprehended. But they be of a contrary 
opinion : that is, that no man ought to be counted an 
• were. At illi contra censent, neminem pro inimico 
habendum, a quo nihil iniuriae profectum est ; naturae consortium 
1 Namely, in the old world. The 
use of illic and llic in the same sentence 
of the Latin, both denoting Europe 
R from different points of view, is a little 
confusing. 
-
[CH. 
enemy, whyche hath done no iniury; and that the felow­
shyppe of nature is a stronge league ; and that men 
be better and more surely knitte toge· 
thers by loue and beneuolence, then 
by couenauntes of leagues ; by 
hartie affection of minde, 
then by woor-
des. VIII.] of Utopia. 243 
4> f 1ll a t fa t r, 
WArre or battel as a thinge very beastelye t, and yet to 
no kynde of beastes in so muche vse as it is • to 
man, they do detest and abhorre ; and, contrarye to the 
custome almost of all other natyons, they cownte nothinge 
so much against glorie, as glory gotten in warre. And 
therefore, though they do daily practise and exercise 
themselfes in the discypline of warre, and that b not only 
the men, but also the women, vpon certeyne appoynted 
dayes, leste they shoulde be to seke in the feat of armes 
yf nead should requyre ; yet they neuer to • goo to 
battayle, but other in the defence of their owne cown­
treye, or to dryue owte of theyr frendes Iande the enemyes 
that be comen in •t, or by their powre to deliuer from the 
a it is omitud. b that omitted. 
• that baue inuaded it. This dcriva- though not with the same etymology 
tion is given iutheComJUOpiM: • &111141, in view, on the word Wl11m: 'Cae­
immanis fera, quasi bJI11m gerens, a terum, ut verum dicam, Wlis invita 
quo lwiiNU.NS adiectivum,' &c. 32), plays similarly, (Musica loq.). 
R2 
-
244 (Ca. 
yocke and bondage of tyrannye some people that be 
oppressed wyth tyranny •. Whyche thynge they doo 
of meere pytye and compassion. Howebeit they sende 
healpe to theyre fryndes ; not euer 1 in theire defence, but 
sumtimes also to requyte and reuenge iniuries before to 
them done. But thys they do not, onles their counsell 
and aduise in the matter be asked, whyles yt ys yet newe 
and freshe. For yf they fynde the cause probable, and yf 
the contrarye parte wyll not restore agayne suche thynges 
as be of them iustelye demaunded, then they be the 
chyeffe auctores and makers of the warre. Whyche they 
do not onlye as ofte as by inrodes and inuasions of sol­
diours prayes and booties be dreuen away, but then also 
much more mortally, when their frindes marchauntes in 
any land, other vnder the pretence of vniust Iawes, or els 
by the wresting and wronge vnderstonding of good Iawes, 
do sustaine an vniust accusation vnder the colour of ius­
tice. N other the battel which the vtopians fowghte for 
the Nephelogetes against the Alaopolitanes 2, a lytle before 
oure time, was made for annye other cause, but that the 
• (that be, .. tyrannye] that be therewith oppressed . ' men of Blindville,' are suggestive of 
' The names here devised, Nf4NA6- the Vmu Hi&loric of Lucian. 
-y.nu, •Cioudlanders,' and' AAaOII'oAiTa•, 
Ca. Vlll.] of Utopia. 245 
Nephelogete marchaunte men, as the vtopians thought, 
suffred wrong of the Alaopolitanes, vnder the pretence of 
righte. But whether it were righte or wrong, it was with 
so cruell and mortal warre reuenged, the countreis round 
about ioyning their healpe and powre to the puisaunce and 
malice of bothe parties, that most florishing and wealthie 
peoples beyng some of them shrewedely shaken, and some 
of them sharpely beaten, the mischeues were not finished 
nor ended, untill the Alaopolitanes at the last were yelded 
vp as bondmen into the iurisdiction of the N ephelogetes. 
For the vtopians foughte not this warre for themselfes. 
And yet the N ephelogetes before the warre, when the 
Alaopolitanes flourished in wealth, were nothyng to be 
compared with them. 
So egerly the Vtopians prosequute the iniuries done to 
ther frindes, yea, in money matters ; and not their owne 
likewise. For if they by coueyne or gyle be wiped beside 
their gooddes 1, so that no violence be done to their bodies, 
they wreake their anger by absteining from occupieng 
with that nation, untill they haue made satisfaction. 
Tam acriter Vtopienses amicorum, etiam in pecuniis, iniuriam 
persequuntur, suas ipsorum non item ; qui sicubi circunscripti boriis 
excidant, modo corporibus absit uis, hactenus irascuntur uti, quoad 
1 That is, cheated out of their goods. 
In Coopers Tlluaunu, cd. the 
sentence from Terence (PIIonff. 
4· 1) 'emunxi argenta senes • is ren­
dered ' I have wipte the old fooles 
from al their money.' The use of ' beside' for ' out of' may be illustrated 
from a passage in Foxe : Ads anti 
Mon. 384 (quoted in the Nn» 
Eng/iM Didiow~ty)-' He put the uew 
Pope Alexander beside the cushion, 
and was made pope himself.' 
ttbe seconn 15ofte [CR. 
for bicause they set lesse stoore by their owne cytyzeyns, 
then by theire frindes ; but that they take the losse of 
their fryndes money more heuely then the losse of theyr 
owne : bicause that their frindes marchaunte men, foras­
muche as that they leise is their owne priuate gooddes, 
susteyne great damage by the losse ; but their owne 
citizeyns leise nothing but of the commen gooddes, and of 
that which was at home plentifull and almost superfluous, 
elles hadde it not bene sent furth. Therfore no man 
feeleth the losse. And for this cause they thynke it to 
cruell an acte to reuenge that losse wyth the death of 
many ; the incommoditie of the whiche losse no man 
feeleth nother in his liffe, nother• in his liuinge. But if 
it chaunce that any of their men in any other countreye 
be maymed or kylled, whether it be done by a commen 
or a priuate councell; knowing and trying out the treuth 
of the matter by their ambassadours, onles the offenders 
be. rendered vnto them in recompence of the iniury, they 
will not be appeased; but incontinent they proclayme 
warre against them. The offenders yelded they punnishe 
other with death or with bondage. 
1 A rarer word than tktri"""l""'• but used once by Cicero. 
CR. VIII.] Of Utopfa. 247 
They be not only sorye, but also ashamed to atchieue 
the victory with much • bloodshed 1 ; cowntinge it greate 
follye to bye pretyous wares to dere. They reioyse and 
auaunte themselfes, yf they vaynquyshe and oppresse 
theire enemyes by crafte and deceyt. And for that act 
they make a generall tryumphe; and as yf the matter 
were manfullye handeled, they sett vp a pyller of stone 1 
in the place where they so vanquysshed theyre ennemyes, 
in token of the vyctory. For then they glorye, then they 
booste and cracke that they haue plaied the men in dede, 
when they haue so ouercommen, as no other lyuynge 
creature but onely man coulde; that ys to saye, by the 
myghte and pusyaunce b of wytte. For wyth boddelye 
strengthe (saye they) beares, lyons, boores, wulffes, dogges, 
and other wylde beastes doo fyghte 1• And as the mooste 
a much oMilkd. corporibus. -------------------- ------
1 See the Introduction, p. xlvii ; and 
compare the remarks of Erasmus on 
the proverb • incruentum statuit tro­
phaeum' (A ~lap, ed. 
A saying of Pittacus is quoted, ' opor­
tere victorias citra sanguinem fieri.' 
1 Lat. tropllnl,, a trophy. 
1 With this compare what Erasmus 
wrote to the Abbot of St. Bertin, 
in a letter dated London, March 14, 
1513-14: •We are worse than the 
dumb animals, for among them it is 
only the wild beasts that wage war, and even they do not fight among 
themselves, but with beasts of a dif­
ferent species, and that with the 
weapons with which nature has fur­
nished them.' Drummond's Lifo of £,_,..., i. aa6, In a similar strain, 
but in language blending argument and 
satire together with a power seldom 
met with, the 'timid' Erasmus attacks 
the bellicose potentates of his day, in 
his .A.Mgitl. See the long disquisition 
headed lmpnilitt. 
«:be seconll 16ofle [Ca. 
parte of them doo passe vs in strengthe and fyerce 
courage, so in wytte and reason wee be !Duche stronger 
than they all. 
Theyre chyefe and princypall purpose in warl'e ys to 
obteyne that thynge, whyche yf they had before obteyned, 
they wolde not haue moued battayle. But if that be not 
possible, they take so cruell vengeaunce of them whych 
be in the fault, that euer after they be aferde to doo the 
lyke. Thys ys theyre cheyffe and pryncypall intente, 
whyche they immedyatelye and fyrste of all prosequute 
and sette forewarde ; but yet so, that they be more cyr­
cumspecte in auoydynge and eschewynge ieopardyes, 
then they be desyerous of prayse and renown e. Therfore 
immediatly after that warre is ones solemply denounced, 
they procure manye proclamations, signed with their 
owne commen seale, to be sett up preuilie at one time in 
their ennemyes Iande, in places mooste frequented. In 
thyes proclamatyons they promysse greate rewardes to 
hym that will kyll their enemies prince; and sumwhat 
lesse gyftes, but them verye greate also, for euerye heade 
of them, whose names be in the sayde proclamacions 
conteined. They be those whome they count their chieffe 
aduersaries, next vnto the prince. 249 
scribed vnto him that killeth any of the proclamed persons, 
that is dobled to him that bringeth any of the same to 
them aliue : yea, and to the proclamed persones them 
selfes, if they wil chaunge their mindes and come into 
them, takinge their partes, they profer the same greate 
rewardes with pardon, and suerty of their liues. 
Therfore it quickely cummeth to passe that they• haue 
al other men in suspicion, and be vnfaithfull and mis· 
trusting emong themselfes one to another; liuing in great 
feare and in no lese ieopardye. For it is well knowen 
that dyuers times the most part of them, and specially the 
prince him selfe, hath bene betraied of them in whome 
they put their most hoope and trust. So that 1 there is no 
maner of acte nor dede, that giftes and rewardes do 
not enforce men vnto. And in rewardes they kepe no 
measure ; but, remembring and considering into howe 
great hasard and ieopardie they call them, endeuoure 
themselfes 2 to recompence the greatenes of the daunger 
• their enemies. The Latin 
is Ta,. faa1,, &c., • so easily an: men 
incited by gifts to any deed whatever.' 
In the edition of 1634 ' that ' is omitted. 
Burnet connects the sentence with 
what follows: ' For the Rewards that 
the Utopitm& offer are so unmeuurably great, that there is no Sort of Crime 
to which Men cannot be drawn by 
them.' 
• This is the reflexive use of the 
verb, as it occurs in the Collect for 
the Second Sunday after Easter. 
endeavour thyself to sleep.' A large 
-
[Ca. 
with lyke great benefites. And therfore they promisse 
not only wonderfull greate abundaunce of golde, but also 
Iandes of greate reuenues, lyenge in moost sauffe places 
emonge theire fryndes. And theyre promysses they per­
fourme faythfully, wythowte annye fraude or couyne. 
Thys custome of byinge and sellynge aduersaryes 
amonge other people ys dysallowed, as a cruell acte of 
a basse and a cowardyshe mynde. But they in thys 
behalfe thynke themselfes muche prayse woorthye, as 
who lyke wyse men by thys meanes dyspatche greate 
warres wyth owte annye battell or skyrnyshe. Yea, they 
cownte yt also a dede of pyty and mercye, bycause that 
by the deathe of a fewe offenders the lyues of a greate 
numbre of ynnocentes, as well of their own men as also 
of their enemies, be raunsomed and saued, which in 
fighting shoulde haue bene sleane. For they doo no 
lesse pytye the basse and commen sorte of theyr enemyes 
people, then they doo theyre owne ; knowynge that they 
be dryuen to • warre agaynste theyre wylles by the 
furyous madnes of thcyre prynces and heades. 
Yf by none of thies meanes the matter go forwarde as 
• and enforced to. 
Si res hoc pacto non procedat, dissidiorum semina iaciunt aluntque ; 
collection of examples will be found 
in the Nn11 LfK/islt Didi011tlry, and in the Clritll Jounrtll, May 15, 1862, and 
May 14, 11164-
Ca. 
they wolde haue yt, then they procure occasyons of debate 
and dyssentyon to be spredde emonge theyre enemyes ; 
as by bryngynge the prynces brother, or some of the 
noble men, in hoope to obtayne the kyngedome 1• Yf thys 
way preuayle not, then they reyse vp the people that be 
nexte neygheboures and borderers to theyr enemyes, and 
them they sette in theyre neckes 2 vnder the coloure of 
some olde tytle of ryghte, suche as kynges doo neuer 
lacke. To them they promysse theire helpe and ayde 
in theyre warre. And as for moneye they gyue them 
abundance ; but of theyre owne cytyzeyns they sende 
to them fewe or none. Whome they make so much of, 
and loue so intyerlye, that they wolde not be willing to 
chaung anye of them for their aduersaries prince. But 
their gold and siluer, bycause they kepe yt all for thys 
fratre principis aut aliquo e nobilibus in spem potiundi regni perducto. At aurum argentumque, quoniam unum hunc in usum 
1 More may have been thinking of 
the intrigues carried on by his own 
sovereign in Scotland in the very year 
(rsrs) in which this was written. 
Since the battle of Flodden, In 1513. 
which left a mere child inheritor of 
the throne, Henry had been trying by 
every crooked means to get the boy 
and his mother (Henry"s own sister, 
Margaret) into his power. The com­
ments of the Scotch historian on his 
conduct will illustrate what is said in 
the text: • Bymeansofhis indefatigable 
agent, Lord Dacre, he had not only 
corrupted some of its leading nobility, 
but so successfully fomented dissen­
sions amongst them, that every eft"ort 
of the regent to re-establish the con­
trol of the laws was rendered abortive by the prevalence of private war.'­
Tytler, as before, ii. 305· ' He 
must be dull indeed,' writes Professor 
Brewer,' who does not perceive that 
Utopia, when following out these 
principles, is removed but a few miles 
from the English Channel; and that 
a practice, which seems the more 
odious In these upright and wise Uto­
pians, was tenfold more unjustifiable 
in those who, professing the doctrines 
of Christ, never scrupled to employ the 
same means against their own enemies.' 
-R,g.. of He11ry Y/11, i. The 
wonder is that More, even under cover 
of a learned language, should have had 
the boldness to expose these proceed­
ings so unmistakeably. 
only purpose, they laye it owte frankly and frely; as who 
shoulde lyue euen as wealthely, if they hadde bestowed it 
euerye pennye. Yea, and besydes theyre ryches, whyche 
they kepe at home, they haue also an infynyte treasure 
abrode, by reason that (as I sayde before) manye natyons 
be in their debte. Therefore they hyere soldyours oute of 
all countreys, and sende them to battayle ; but cheiflye of 
the Zapoletes 1• Thys people is .500. myles from Vtopia 
eastewarde. They be hydeous 1, sauage, and fyerce, 
dwellynge in wild woodes and high mountaines, where 
they were bredde and brought vp. They be of an harde 
nature, able to abide and susteine heate, cold, and labour; 
abhorrynge from all delycate deyntyes, occupyenge no 
husbandrye nor tyllage of the ground, homelye and rude 
both in the • buildinge of their houses and in their appar­
rell ; geuen vnto no goodnes, but onelye to the breede b 
• the omillnl. Dura gens, aestus frigoris et laboris patiens, delitiarum 
expers omnium, neque agriculturae studens, et cum aedificiorum tum 
1 The edition of 1517 has a marginal 
note at this point : • Gens baud ita 
dissimilis eluetiis.' But even without 
this the allusion to the Swiss would 
be obvious. They were the great mer­
cenaries of the period.-See Oman's 
Arl of War ill tlu Miriril1 AgG, t88s, 
pp. 6li-95- Their tactics resembled 
those of the Macedonian phalanx. 
It is strange that the derivation of 
' Zapoletes' should have perplexed 
commentators. We cannot be sure whether More meant the nominative 
to represent z.....,Aijnu or Za~,.,ol; 
but in either case, whether as • ready 
sellers • (of themselves), or 'readily 
sold,' the word would naturally ex­
press mercenaries. 
1 The Latin horridN!I was probably 
used by More to e:r.press only • rough.' 
Robynson seems to have taken it in the 
sense (a legitimate . one) of' dreadful,' 
which 'hideous' in his time would 
stiU express. See the Glossary. 
and bringynge vp of cattell. The mooste parte of theire 
lyuynge is by huntynge and stealynge. They be borne 
onelye to warre, whyche they dylygentlye and eamestlye 
seke for. And when they haue gotten yt, they be wonders 
gladde therof. They goo furthe of ~heyre countreye in 
greate companyes together. and who soeuer lacketh soul­
dyours, there they proffer theyre seruyce for small wages. 
Thys ys onely the crafte that • they haue to gette theyre 
lyuynge by. They maynteyne theyr lyfe by sekyng 
theyre deathe. For them, whomewyth they be in wayges, 
they fyghte hardelye, fyerslye, and faythefullye. But 
they bynde themselfes for no certeyne tyme. But vpon 
thys condytion they entre into bondes, that the nexte daye 
they wyll take parte wyth the other syde for greatter 
wayges; and the nexte daye after that they wyll be 
readye to come backe agayne for a lytle more moneye 1• 
There be fewe warres there awaye, wherin is not a greate 
• that ollfitt«<. Rarum oritur bellum, in quo non bona 
1 It will be noticed how much space 
More devotes to the ways and doings 
of this people. This may have been 
due to the prominent part played by 
the Swiss in European affairs about 
the time he ~rote. At the great battle 
of Marignano, in October, ISIS, they 
fought on the side of Ferdinand and 
the Pope against the King of France, 
and were defeated. In that same 
year More's friend Richard Pace, was 
sent to Zorich, to negotiate for their help. His letter to Wolsey is dated 
at the end of November, ISIS, and 
gives a striking picture of the state 
of the country, and the exorbitant 
demands of the Swiss mercenarie~ 
The letter is preserved in Cotton MSS .. 11211, from which it 
was printed in Planta's History of 
tit~ Hnwtic COIIf«iwacy, 18o7, ii. 
numbre of them in bothe partyes. Therefore yt daylye 
chauncethe that nye kynsefolke, whyche were hiered 
together on one parte, and there verye fryndelye and 
famylyerly vsed themselfes one wyth an other, shortely 
after, beynge separate into • contrarye partes, runne one 
agaynste an other enuyouslye and fyercelye ; and for­
gettynge bothe kyndred and frendeshyp, thruste theyre 
swordes one in another : and that for none other cause, 
but that they be hyered of contrarye prynces-for a lytle 
moneye. Whyche they doo so hyghelye regarde and 
esteame, that they will easelye be prouoked to chaunge 
partes for a halfpenye more wayges by the daye. So 
quyckelye they haue taken a smacke in couetesenes ; 
whyche for all that ys to them no proffyte. For, that 
they gette by fyghtynge, ymmedyatelye they spende 
vnthryftelye and wretchedlye in ryott. 
Thys people fyghte for the Vtopyans agaynste all 
natyons, bycause they giue them greatter wayges, then 
annye other natyon wyll. For the Vtopians, lyke as they 
seke good men to vse wei, so they seke thyes euell and 
vycyous men to abuse. Whome, when neade requyreth, 
•· in. VIII.] Of Utopia. 255 
wyth promisses of greate rewardes they putt furthe into 
greate ieopardyes ; from whens the mooste part of them 
neuer cummeth againe to aske their rewardes. But to 
them that remain on liue • they paye that which they 
promissed faithfully, that they may be the more willinge 
to put themselfes in like daungers another time. Nor the 
Vtopians passe not how many of them they bring to 
distruction. For they beleue that they should doo a very 
good deade for all mankind, if they could ridde out of the 
wordle all that fowle, stinkinge denne of that most wicked 
and cursed people 1• 
Next vnto thies they vse the soldiours of them whom 
they fight for b. And then the help of their other frindes. 
And last of al they ioyne to 1 their owne citizeins. Emong 
whome they gyue to one of tried vertue and prowes the 
rewle, goouernaunce, and conductyon of the hole armye. 
Vnder hym they appoynte ii. other, whyche whyles he ys 
sauffe be bothe pryuate and owte of offyce ; but yf he be 
a aliue. b for whom they fight. Huic duos ita substituunt, uti eo 
136 incolumi I ambo priuati sint ; capto aut interempto, alter e duobus 
1 Robynson's epithets are vigorous, 
but in this case hardly surpass More's 
own. I do not know whether Erasmus 
is referring to the same people, when 
he writes : ' Quin est apud Germanos 
populus, cuius haec praecipua gloria, 
quam plurimos mortales ferro truci-dasse : quod cum per se immane est, 
tum hoc etiam foedius, quod hoc fa· 
ciunt mercede conducti; veluti carnifex 
quispiam ad lanienam precio emptus.' 
Atlagia, as before p. 4& L 
1 'Join to;' that is, add or asso· 
ciate. 
(CR. 
taken or slayne, the one of the other .ii. succedeth hym, 
as yt were by inherytaunce 1• And if the second miscarry, 
then the third taketh hys rowme; leaste that (as the 
chaunce of battell ys vncerteyne and dowtefull}, the 
yeopardye or deathe of the capytayne shoulde brynge the 
hole armye in hasarde. They chuse soldyers ·owte of 
euerye cytye those whyche putt furthe themselfes wyl­
Iynglye. For they thruste no man furthe into warre 
agaynste hys wyll ; bycause they beleue, yf annye man be 
fearefull and faynte harted of nature, he wyll not onelye 
doo no man full and hardye act hym selfe, but also by • 
occasyon of cowardenes to hys fellowes. But yf annye 
battell be made agaynste theyre owne countreye, then 
they putt thyes cowardes, so that they be stronge bodyed, 
in shyppes emonge other bolde harted men. Or elles 
they dyspose them vpon the walles, from whens they 
maye not flye. Thus, what for shame that theyre enne­
myes be at hande, and what for bycause they be withowt 
hope of runnynge awaye, they forgette all feere. And 
manye tymes extreame necessytye turneth cowardnes into 
prowes and manlynes. 
But as none of them ys thrust forthe of his countrey 
• be. 
At sicuti ad externum bellum ex ipsis nemo protrahitur nolens, ita 
1 This was the Lacedaemonian custom. VIII.] Of Utopia. 257 
into warre agaynste hys wyll, so women that be wyllynge 
to accompanye their husbandes in times of warre be not 
prohybyted or stopped •. Yea, they prouoke and exhorte 
them to yt wyth prayses. And in sett fylde the wyues doo 
stande euerye one by here owne husbandes syde. Also 
euery man is compassed nexte abowte wyth hys owne 
chyldren, kins folkes, and alliaunce ; that they, whom 
nature chiefelye moueth to mutuall succoure, thus stond­
ynge together, maye helpe one an other 1• It is a great 
reproche and dishonestie for the husbande to come home 
wythowte hys wiffe, or the wiffe withoute her husband, or 
the sonne without his father. And therfore, if the other 
part sticke so harde by it, that the battell come to their 
handes, it is fought with great slaughter and bloodshed, 
euen to the vtter destruction of both partes. For as they 
make all the meanes and shyftes that maye be, to kepe 
themselfes from the necessitye of fyghtynge, so that they 
may dispatche the battell by their hiered soldyours, so, 
when there is no remedy but that they muste neades 
fyghte themselfes, then they do as corragiouslye fall to 
• Jetted. It was 
the same, to a great degree, with the 
ucient Gauls ud Britons. 
it, as before, whyles they myght, they dyd wyselye auoyde 
it•. Nor they be not moste fierce at the fyrst bronte. 
But in continuaunce by Iitle and lytle theire fierce corrage 
encreaseth, with so stubborne and obstynate myndes, 
that they wyll rather die then gyue backe an ynche. For 
that suertye of lyuynge, whiche euery man hath at home, 
beynge ioyned with noo carefull anxietye or remem­
braunce how theire posteritie shall lyue after them (for 
this b pensifenes oftentymes breaketh and abateth coura­
gious stomakes) maketh them stowte and hardy, and dys­
daynful to be conquered. Moreouer, theire knowledge in 
cheualrye and feates of armes putteth them in a good 
hope. Finally, the holsome and vertuous opinions, 
wherin they were brought vp euen from theire child­
bode, partely through learnyng, and partelye throughe the 
good ordenaunces and Iawes of theire weale publique, 
augmente and encrease theire manfull currage. By reason 
whereof they nother set so Iitle store by theire liues, that 
they will rasshely and vnaduisedlye cast them away; nor 
they be not so farre in lewde and fond loue therewith, that 
they will shamefully couete to kepe them, when honestie 
biddeth leaue them. 
When the battel is hottest and in al places most fierce 
• and n:fuse it. • his. vm.] of Utopia. 259 
and feruent, a bende of chosen and picked yong men, 
whiche be sworne to liue and dye togethers, take vpon 
them to destroye theire aduersaries capitaine 1• Hym • 
they inuade, now with preuy wyeles, now by open 
strength. At hym they strike both nere and farre of. 
He is assayled with a long and a continewal assault 2 ; 
freshe men styll commyng in the weried mens places. 
And seldome it chaunceth (onles he saue hymselfe by 
flying) that he is not other slayne, or els taken prysoner, 
and yelded to his enemies alyue. If they wynne the 
fyelde, they persecute not theire enemies with the violent 
rage of slaughter. For they had rather take them aliue 
then kyll them. N other they do so followe the chase and 
pursute of theire enemies, but they leaue behynde them 
one parte of theire hoste in battayl arraye vn&er theire 
standardys. In so muche that, if all theire hole armie be 
discumfetyd and ouercum, sauing the rerewarde, and that 
they therewith achieue the victory, then they had rather 
lette all theire enemies scape, then to followe them owt of 
array. For they remembre it hath chaunced vnto them-
• whome. 
1 Tactics not unheard of in modem 1 In the Latin, "'""(: a wedge-
football matches. shaped, or compact, body of assailants, 
52 
260 [Ca. 
selfes more then ones : the hole powre and strength of 
theyre hoste being vanquished and put to flight, whiles 
theire enemies, reioysing in the victory, haue persecuted 
them flying, some one way and some an other ; fewe • of 
theire men lying in an ambusshe, there reddy at all occa­
sions 1, haue sodaynly rysen vpon them thus dispersed 
and scattered owt of array, and through presumption of 
safetye vnaduisedly pursuynge the chase, and haue incon­
tinent changed the fortune of the hole battayll; and spyte 
of there tethes wrestynge owt of theire handes the sure 
and vndowted victory, being a Iitle before conquered, haue 
for theire parte conquired the conquerers. 
It is hard to say whether they be craftier in laynge 
an ambusshe, or wittier in auoydynge the same. Y owe 
woulde thynke they intende to flye, when they meane 
nothing lesse. And contrary wise, when they go about 
that purpose, yow wold beleue it were the least part of 
their thoughte. For if they perceaue themselfes other 
ouermatched in numbre, or closed in to narrowe a place, 
• a small companye. 
Nam si nimium sese· sentiunt aut numero aut loco premi, tunc aut 
1 That is, watching their oppor­
tunity. For the subject of laying 
ambuscades, see Polyaenus, Strtll•g. 
1 As usu IIIHisu ul precedes, this 
should have been mulaumnl, and 
uian;.t just after. The error, due to the length of the sentence, is left 
uncorrected in later editions. 
1 This should probably be two 
words, ;,. 
• A form common in Plautus and 
Terence, whence probably More took 
it. 
CH. 
then they remoue their campe other in the nyght season 
with silence, or by some pollicie they deceaue theire ene· 
mies ; or in the daye time they retiere backe so softely I, 
that it is no lesse ieoperdie to medle with them when they 
gyue backe then when they preese on. They fence and 
fortifie theire campe sewerlye with a deape and a brode 
trenche. The earth therof is cast inward 1• Nor they do 
not set drudgeis and slaues a worke about it. It is doone 
by the handes of the souldiours them selfes. All the hole 
armye worketh vpon it, except them that watche • in har­
neis before the trenche for sodeyne auentures. Therefore, 
by the labour of so manye, a large trenche closinge in 
a great compasse of grounde is made in lesse tyme then 
any man wold beleue. 
The.ire armoure or harneis whiche they weare is sure 
and stronge to receaue strokes, and handsome for all 
mouinges and gestures of the bodye; in so muche that 
it is not vnweldy to swymme in. For in the discipline 
• kepe watche and warde. 
' For this use of the word • softly,' 
Lat. snuim, see the Glossary. Robyn• 
son leaves out the clause, tali uruato 
orrl•n,, ' keeping such good order,' 
and so makes it difficult to see the 
reason for what is stated. 
1 This was the regular custom. See the article Cutra in Smith ·s Did. It was a necessary pro­
ceeding, in order that the aggn', formed 
by the earth thrown out, might be 
itself protected by the trench, and 
more completely under the control of 
the defenders. 
[CR. 
of theire warefare, amonge other feates thei Ierne to 
swimme in harneis 1• Their weapons be arrowes afarre 
of•, which they shote both strongely and suerly 1; not 
onelye fotemen but also horsemen. At hande strokes 
they vse not swordes but pollaxes, whiche be mortall, 
aswel in sharpenes as in weyghte, bothe for foynes and 
downe strokes. Engines for warre they deuyse and in­
uente wonders wittely. Whiche, when they be made, 
they kepe very secret ; leaste if they should be knowen 
before neade requyre, they should be but laughed at, and 
serue to no purpose. But in makynge them, hereunto 
they haue chiefe respecte ; that they be both easy to be 
caried, and handsome to be moued and turned about. 
1 In this suggestion, as in many 
others, More was in advance of his 
own age, or even of ours. The soldiers 
of Charles XII of Sweden were trained 
to cross rivers by swimming. The 
subject may have been freshly brought 
to the minds of English people, a short 
time before More wrote, by the con­
flict between the English and French 
fleets off Brest, Aug. Io, 1512, in 
which the two flagships grappled 
together and both took fire, when 
'the captain of the English ship (being 
the Rrgmt), and of the French ;call'd 
the CortMiln), together with the sol­
diers in them, perished all, save only 
a few French, who saved themselves 
with swimming.' See Lord Herbert 
of Cherbury's Hist. of EnglaNd unrJ" 
Hmry VJJI, ed. ' In this description, and in that of 
the bills or poleaxes just after, we 
easily see a reminiscence of the Eng­
lish archers aud infantry. • In times 
past,' writes Harrison, in a well·known 
passage, • the cheefe force of England 
consisted in their long bowes. But 
now we haue in maner generallie 
giuen ouer that kind of artillerie, and 
for long bowes in deed doo practise 
to shoot com passe for our pastime.'­
lJ,scr;pticm of ENglaNd, ed. 
(For shooting' com passe,' that is, at an 
angle or elevation, see the examples 
given in the Nnu ENglish Diet.) Com­
pare also the extracts from Sir John 
Smythe's Discourses on tlt1 fonu aNd 
'.If Ids of rJiwrs so•·ts of Weapons, quoted 
in Lrllln of eminmt Lilm~ry Mm 
(Camden Society), 1f143, pp. VIII.) Of Utopia. 
Truce taken with theire enemies for a shorte time they 
do so fermelye and faythfully keape, that they wyll not 
breake it; no not though they be theire vnto pn~uoked 1• 
They do not waste nor destroy there enemies Iande with 
forraginges, nor they burne not vp theire corn e. Yea, they 
saue it as muche as maye be from beinge ouerrune and 
troden downe, other with men or horses ; thynkynge that 
it groweth for theire owne vse and proffyt. They hurt no 
man that is vnarmed, onles he be an espiall. All cities 
that be yelded vnto them, they defende. And suche as 
they wynne by force of assaute they nother dispoyle nor 
sacke ; but them that withstode and dyswaded the yeld· 
ynge vp of the same they put to death; the other soul­
diours they punnyshe with bondage. All the weake 
multitude they leaue vntouched. If they knowe that anye 
cytezeins counselled to yelde and rendre vp the citie, to 
them they gyue parte of the condempned mens goodes. 
The resydewe they distribute and gyue frely amonge 
them, whose helpe they had in the same warre. For none 
of them selfes taketh anye portion of the praye. 
But when the battayll is fynyshed and ended, they put 
lnitas cum hostibus inducias tam sancte obseruant, ut ne lacessiti 
quidem uiolent. 
I 40 Caeterum confecto 1 bello non amicis impensas in quos insumpsere, 
1 Compare the Introduction, p. 
1 Burnet, more correctly, 'When 
a Waris ended.' • S«<io is the regular term for dis­
tribution of booty by auction, and the 
like. See Cic. 
theire frendes to neuer a penny coste of al the chardges 
that they were at, but laye it vpon theire neckes that be 
conquered. Them they burdeyne with the hole chardge 
of theire expenceis ; ~hich they demaunde of them par­
telye in money, to be kept for lyke vse of battayll, and 
partelye in Iandes of greate reuenues, to be payae vnto 
them yearlye for euer. Suche reuenues they haue nowe 
in manye countreis; whiche by Iitle and lytle rysyng, of 
dyuers and sondry causes, be encreased -aboue vii. hun­
dreth thousand ducates 1 by the yere. Thither they sende 
furth some of their citezeins as Lieuetenauntes 11, to lyue 
theire sumptuously lyke men of honoure and renowne. 
And yet, this notwithstanding, muche money is saued, 
which commeth to the commen treasory ; onles it so 
chaunce, that thei had rather truste the countrey with the 
money. Which many times thei do so long vntil they 
haue neade to occupie it. And it seldome happeneth, 
that thei demaund al. Of thies Iandes thei assigne part 
vnto them, which at their request and exhortaeion put 
sed uictis imputant, exiguntque eo nomine partim pecuniam, quam 
At hodie 
aictorea 
nwdmam partem 
dependant. Ex his praediis partem assignant illis qui ipsorum 
1 Taking the gold ducat, which is 
the one usually meant, at 9So 4tl., this 
would be about £327,000-
1 The English by itself might seem 
to suggest such an instance as that 
of William, Lord Mountjoy, Erasmus's 
friend and pupil, who was appointed governor of Hammes Castle in Picaniy, 
near the frontiers of Calais. But 
the Latin, tpU~Ufon~m _,,.,,, points 
rather to officials sent out, as Burnet 
words it,' to receive these Revenues.' 
1 Ttn•tisf'W followed by q-tl is 
a post-classical construction. VIII.] Of Utopia. 
themselfes in such ieoperdies as I spake of before. If 
anye prynce stirre vp warre agaynst them, intendyng to 
inuade theire Iande, they mete hym incontinent owt of 
theire owne borders with great powre and strengthe. For 
they neuer lyghtly make warre in their owne countrei. 
Nor 
they be neuer brought into so ex­
treme necessitie, as to take 
helpe out of forreyne 
Iandes into thire 
owne Ilande. 
266 ~be seconn 15ofte (CH. 
gyons in Vtopia. 
THere be dyuers kyndes of religion, not only in 
sondry partes of the Ilande, but also in dyuers places 
of euerye citie. Some worshyp for God the sunne ; • 
some the mone ; some some other of the planetes 1• 
There be that gyue worshyp to a man that was ones of 
excellente vertue or of famous glory 2, not only as God, 
but also as the chiefest and hyghest God. But the moste 
and the wysest parte (reiectynge all thies) beleue that 
there is a certayne Godlie powre unknowen, euerlastyng, 
DE RELIGIONIBVS 
VTOPIENSIVM. maxima pars, eademque 
Ionge prudentior, nihil horum, sed unum quoddam numen putant, 
1 These various opinions are dis­
cussed by Lactantius, Op. • Non est astrorwn motus 
voluntarius, sed necessarius; quia 
praestitutis legibus ofliciisque deser­
\'iunt.' They therefore cannot be gods. 
The opinion that the Deity was •numen 
quoddam, per mundum diffusum' (re­
ferred to just afterwards) was akin to 
that of Pythagoras : ' Pythagoras ita definivit quid esset Deus :,Animus, qui 
per universas mundi partes omnemque 
naturam commeans atque dill' usus' (lb. also Cicero, ]), Nat. 
1 As Gaudama the Buddha, Con­
fucius, or Zoroaster. But the ex­
pressions which follow would be too 
strong to apply to these. 
CR. 
incomprehensible, inexplicable, farre aboue the capacitie 
and retche of mans witte, dispersed through out all the 
worlde, not in bygnes, but in vertue and powre 1• Hym 
they call the father of all. To hym allone they attrybute 
the begynnynges, the encreasynges, the procedynges, the 
chaunges, and the en des of all thynges. N other they 
gyue deuine • honours to any other then to him. 
Yea, all the other also, though they be in diuers 
opinions, yet in this pointe they agree all togethers with 
the wisest sort, in beleuynge that there is one chiefe and 
pryncipall God, the maker and ruler of the hole worlde; 
whome they all commonly in theire countrey language call 
Mythra J. But in this they disagre, that amonge some he 
is counted one, and amonge some an other. For euery 
one of them, whatsoeuer that is whiche he taketh for the 
chiefe God, thynketh it to be the very same nature, to 
whose onlye deuyne myght and maiestie the som and 
soueraintie of al thinges, by the consent of all people, 1s 
• any deuine. 
Quin caeteris quoque omnibus, quanquam diuersa credentibus, hoc 
tamen cum istis conuenit, quod esse quidem unum censent summum, 
cui et uniuersitatis opificium et prouidentia debeatur ; eumque com­
muniter omnes patria lingua Mythram appellant, sed eo dissentiunt, 
quod idem alius apud alios habetur; autumante quoque, quicquid 
id sit quod ipse summum ducit, eandem illam prorsus esse naturam, 
cuius unius numini ac maiestati rerum omnium summa omnium 
1 This seems a reminiscence of Vir· 
gil's' totamque infusa per artus I mens 
agitat molem ; ' though the use of the 
word uirlut,, in the Latin, may rather 
point to the imitation of that passage 
by Statius, Tlrlll. 1 More had before remarked, that 
the old language of the Utopians 
was • not unlike the Persian tongue.' 
Hence the name of the Persian Sun­
god is appropriately used here. See 
the note above, p. 
attributed and geuen. Howe be it, they al begynne by 
Iitle and Iitle to forsake and fall from thys varietie of 
superstitions, and to agree togethers in that religion 
whiche semethe by reason to passe and excell the resy­
dewe. And it is not to be dowted but all the other would 
Ionge agoo haue bene abolyshed ; but that, whatsoeuer 
vnprosperous thynge happened to any of them as he was 
mynded to chaunge his religion, the fearefulnes of people 
dyd take it not as a thynge cummynge by chaunce, but as 
sente frt>me God owt of heauen 1 ; as thoughe the God, 
whose honoure he was forsakynge, woulde reuenge that 
wicked purpose against him. 
But after they harde vs speake of the name of Christe, 
of his doctryne, Iawes, myracles, and of the no Jesse won­
derful constancie of so manye martyrs, whose bloude 
wyllynglye shedde brought a great numbre of nations 
throughe out all partes of the worlde into theire secte ; 
yowe wyll not beleue with howe gladde myndes they 
agreed vnto the same ; whether it were by the secrete 
consensu gentium tribuitur. 
1 Compare what was said in the In­
troduction, p. xlix, about the origin of 
the lR Civilat' Dn', and St. Augustine's 
own statement in the first chapter of his g~at work: • Sic evaserunt multi, 
qui nunc Christianis temporibus detra­
hunt, et mala quae ilia civitas pertulit 
Christo imputant.' 
Cs,IX.] or Otopta. 
inspiration of God, or els for that they thought it next a 
vnto that opinion which amonge them is counted the 
chiefest. Howe be it, I thynke this was no smal healpe 
and furtheraunce in the matter, that they harde vs saye 
that Christ instytuted 1 amonge hys all thynges commen; 
and that the same communitie dothe yet remayne amongest 
the rightest Christian companies 2• Verely, howe soeuer 
it came to passe, manye of them consented togethers in 
oure religion, and were wasshed in the hollye water of 
baptisme 3• 
But because amonge vs foure (for no moo of vs was left 
alyue; two of oure companye beynge deade ') there was · 
no prieste, whiche I am ryghte sorye for, they, beinge 
entered and instructed in all other poyntes of oure rely· 
gion, lacke onelye those sacramentes, whyche here none 
but priestes do minister. Howe be it, th~y vnderstande 
and perceyue them, and be verye desierous of the same. 
Yea, they reason and dispute the matter earnestly amonge 
• nieghest. quin hoc quoque sedulo iam inter se disputant, an 
1 This is too strong a rendering 
of Clt,isto plt~CNWI : • that Christ ap­
proved of a community of living among 
his followers.' 
1 The marginal note in the Latin 
points the allusion to monasteries. 
3 & to the lawfulness of lay baptism in exceptional cases, which must be 
understood here, see Bingham, Anli­
fHiM, Bk. § 9-
• The party bad originally consisted 
of Hytbloday and five companions. 
See above, p. :19· 
tcbe seconb 15olte (Ca. 
themselfes, whether, without the. sendyng of a christian 
bysshoppe, one chosen out of theire owne people may 
receaue the ordre of priesthode. And truly they were 
mynded to chuse one: but at my departure from them 
they hadde chosen none. They also, whiche do not agree 
to Christes religion, feare 1 no man frome it, nor speake 
agaynste anye man that hath receyued it. Sauing that 
one of oure companye in my presence was sharpely 
punyshed. He, as sone as he was baptised, began against 
our willes, with more earnest affection then wisdome, to 
reason of Christes religion ; and began to waxe so hotte in 
his matter, that he dyd not only preferre oure relygion 
before all other, but also dyd vtterlye despise an con­
dempne al other, callynge them prophane, and the fol· 
lowers of them wicked and deuelishe 11, and the chyldren 
of euerlasting dampnation. When he had thus longe 
reasoned the matter, they layde holde on hym, accused 
hym, and condempned hym into exyle; not as a despyser 
of religion, but as a sedicious persone, and a rayser vp 
of dissention amonge the people. For this is one of the 
sine Christiani pontificis missu quisquam e suo numero delectus sacer­
dotii consequatur characterem. 
1 The Latin is not quite so strong, 
being literally, as Burnet renders it, ' impious and sacrilegious Persons.' 
• P6ragwr, as a law term, meant • to 
prosecute to conviction.' 
CH. 
auncientest Iawes amonge them : that no man shalbe 
blamed for reasonynge in the mayntenaunce of his owne 
religion 1• 
For kyng Vtopus, euen at the first begynning, hearing 
that the inhabitauntes of the Iande were before his com­
myng thether at contynuall dissention and stryfe among 
themselfes for their religions; perceyuing also that this 
common dissention, whyles euerye seuerall secte tooke 
seuerall partes in fyghting for theire countrey, was the 
only occasion of hys conquest ouer them all ; assone as 
he had gotten the victory, first of all he made a decrie, 
that it shoulde be lawfull for euery man to fauoure and 
followe what religion he would, and that he myght do the 
beste he cold to bryng other to his opinion ; so that he 
dyd it peaceably, gentelye, quyetly, and soberlye, without 
hastye and contentious rebuking and inuehyng against 
interim • antiquissima instituta numerant, ne sua cuiquam religio 
fraudi sit. 
I ~ the sentence is an important 
one, it should be more exactly ren­
dered. It is literally: ' For they 
reckon this among their most ancient 
(or, most important) institutions, that 
no one's religion should be an injury 
to him ; • that is, that no one should be 
worse off for it. A~a, which 
Burnet also renders 'most ancient,' 
may mean • of most importance;' and 
I should have thought that was the b A. 
sense here, but for the mention of 
Utopus's enactment imh ab ;,.,~;o, 
which follows. The passage is one 
to be noted, not only as bearing on 
More's own views of religious tolera­
tion, but as laying down a distinction, 
aignificant as coming from him, be· 
tween punishin! an act as an offence 
against religion, and as an offence 
against the public peace of the realm. 
See the next note. 
other. If he coulde not by fayre and gentle speche induce 
them vnto his opinion, yet he should vse no kinde of 
violence, and refrayne from displeasaunt and seditious 
woordes. To him that would vehemently and feruently 
in this cause striue and contend, was decreid bannishment 
or bondage. 
This lawe did kynge Vtopus make, not only for the 
maintenaunce of peace, which he sawe through continuall 
contention and mortal hatred vtterly extinguished, but 
also because he thought this decrye shuld make for the 
furtheraunce of religion. Wherof he durst define and 
determine nothing vnaduisedly ; as dowting whether god, 
desieryng manifolde and diuers sortes of honoure, would 
inspire sondrie men with sondrie kyndes of religion. And 
this suerly he thought a very vnmete and folishe thing, 
and a pointe of arrogant presumption, to compell all other 
by violence and threatenynges to agre to the same that 
thou beleuest to bee trewe 1• Furthermore though there 
caeteras destruat, si suadendo non persuadeat ; neque uim ullam 
adhibeat, et conuiciis temperet. 
1 More's tone is too serious, and the 
arguments he makes Utopus employ 
too solid and convincin!, to allow us 
to regard all this as merely proper to 
the romance. On the other hand, if 
the words express to us the author's 
own thoughts on the subject of 
religious toleration, how are we to 
reconcile them with his avowed prin· ciples at a later period J The question 
is a difficult one. It is, of course, 
easy to oll'er as a solution a change of 
opinions, or a revulsion of feeling, 
caused by the Lutheran outbreak. hie flir 11 U# puw. But 
that is only partially satisfactory. 
There is an oft· quoted passage in 
Roper's Lift (ed. 34), which 
CH. IX.) or {!topia. 273 
be one religion whiche alone is trewe, and all other vayne 
and superstitious, yet did he well forsee (so that the matter 
were handeled with reason and sober modestie }, that the 
caeterae omnes uanae, facile tamen praeuidit (modo cum ratione ac 
modestia res agatur) futurum denique ut ipsa per se ueri uis emergat 
shows that, with the spread of' here­
tical ' opinions fully before his eyes, 
he at least doubted the wisdom of 
suppression of them by force. 'Troth 
it is indeed, son Roper,' said More 
(referring to the outward security of 
the Church in England at the time); 
'and yet, son Roper, I pray God, said 
he, that some of us, as high as we 
seem to sit upon the mountains tread­
ing heretics under our feet like ants, 
live not the day that we gladly would 
wish to be at league and composition 
with them, to let them have their 
churches quietly to themselves, so 
that they would be contented to let 
us have ours quietly to ourselves.' 
And on these tolerant principles More 
himself, in the day of his power-if 
we accept his own statement-would 
seem to have acted. ' Dyuers of 
theym,' he says in one place, refer­
ring to Protestants, ' haue saide that 
ol suche as were in my house, while I 
was chauncellour, I vsed to examine 
theym with tormentes, causinge theym 
to bee bounden to a tree in my gar­
deine, and their pituously beaten.' 
But after explaining the cases (two 
only) which gave any shadow of justi­
fication to these reports, he declares 
emphatically that ' of al that euer came 
in my hand for heresye, as belpe me 
God, sauing as I said the sure keeping 
of them, and yet not so sure neither 
but that George Constantine could 
stele awaye : els had neuer any of 
them any stripe or stroke giuen them, 
so mucbe as a fylyppe on the fore­
head' (EIIglult Works, p. 
So far, all would be consistent. 
T But this picture of More has to be 
broU«ht into harmony with another, 
and seemingly very difl"erent one. In 
his epitaph, composed by himself, he 
is described as • furibus, bomicidis, 
baereticisque molestus.' Erasmus 
testifies that he fully bore out this 
description. While he himself pro­
fessed t Work, p. 9115) to hate only 
the vice of heresy, and not the persons 
of heretics, his language towards these 
is barsh •nd violent, and betokens the 
strongest personal antipathy. 
As regards the special cases of Bain­
ham and Tewksbury, alleged by some 
against More (Foxe: Ads and Mrmu· 
"'mls, ed. 6!)81, I for one 
could not discredit More's solemn 
asse~·eration, quoted above. But 
when his biographer pleads that • in 
the administration of those laws ' 
(against heresy) 'be was not only 
rigidly upright, but as tender and 
merciful as is compatible with the 
character and office of a judge,' while 
yet affirming that, ' he held strongly 
that the dogmatizing heretics of those 
days, in the then circumstances of 
England and Christendom, should be 
forcibly repressed, and, if necessary 
punished even by death, according to 
the existing laws' (Bridgett: Lift, 
p. :a7 I) -many people will feel a 
difficulty in harmonizing the two pic­
tures. The description of England as 
'a country hitherto in perfect peace 
and unity in religious matters' li6. 
:a6:J), is too imaginary a one to con­
tribute much to our enlightenment.­
See, for further views of the subject. 
-
274 [CB. 
trewthe of the owne powre 1 woulde at the laste issue 
owte and come to lyght. But if contention and debate in 
that behalfe shoulde continuallye be vsed, as the woorste 
men be moste obstynate and stubbume, and in theire euell 
opynion moste constante; he perceaued that then the 
beste and holyest religion woulde be troden vnder foote 
and destroyed by moste vayne superstitions; euen as good 
come is by thornes and weydes ouergrowen and choked. 
Therfore al this matter he lefte vndiscussed, and gaue to 
euery man free libertie and choyse to beleue what he 
woulde ; sauinge that he earnestly and straytelye chardged 
them, that no man shoulde conceaue so vile and base an 
opinion of the dignitie of mans nature, as to thinke that 
the sowles do dye and perishe with the bodye ; or that 
the worlde runneth at al auentures, gouerned by no diuine 
prouidence. And therfore thei beleue that after this lyfe 
vices be extreamely punyshed, and vertues bountyfully 
rewarded. Hym that is of a contrary opinion tht!y counte 
not in the numbre of men, as one that hath aualed ~ the 
hyghe nature of his sowle to the vielnes of brute beastes 
aliquando atque emineat ; sin armis et tumultu certetur, ut sint 
pessimi quique maxime peruicaces, optimam ae sanetissimam reli­
gionem ob uanissimas inter se superstitiones, ut segetes inter spinas 
ac frutiees, obrutum iri. Sidney Lee's article in the Did. of 
Natitnull Bioprrplty, vol. 373 ; 
Gairdner : Ldtws a"tl P11pn-s, v. 77a ; W. Lilly, cw-of Clrris­
tia,;ty, p. a15; Prescott: Fwtlilumd 
a11tl Isowlla, u before, pp • .593, 594 ; Miss Taylor: Mmwir of Sir Tlro'"u 
Mon, 1834, p. 81 : Bishop Creighton : 
Pn-s«utiott ...tJ TolmlfiU, Iii9S. 
I That is, 'that Truth, by its innate 
force.' 
I Lowered, or debased. IX.) Of [Jtopia. 275 
bodies ; muche lesse in the numbre of their c1t1ziens, 
whoes Iawes and ordenaunces, if it were not for feare, he 
wold nothing at al esteme. For yow may be suer that he 
wil study other with crafte preuely to mock, or els vio­
lently to breake, the commen Iawes of his countrey, in 
whom remayneth no further feare then of the Iawes, nor 
no further hope then of the bodye. Wherefore he that is 
thus mynded is depryued of all honours, excluded from all 
offices, and reiecte from all• common administrations in 
the weale publyque. And thus he is of all sorte b despysed 
as of an vnprofitable and of a base and vile nature. Howe 
be it they put hym to no punyshemente 1, because they be 
perswaded that it is in no mans powre to beleue what he 
lyst. No, nor they constrayne hym not with threatninges 
to dissemble his minde, and shewe countenaunce contrary 
to his thoughte. For deceite, and falshed, and all maner 
of lyes, as next vnto fraude, they do meruelouslye deteste 
and abhorre 1• But they suffre him not to dispute in his 
• [offices • • • all) omill#tl. 
1 Exclusion from civil offices, to p. 1384, F.) : 'Among al sort• of 
which a man is otherwise entitled to mischiefe, none can there lightly be 
aspire, is itself a punishment. But fownden more odious vnto God, than 
More no doubt refers to severe or whan we abuse lhinges that be of 
capital punishment (su;p/iciflm) in its their owne nature good, and turne 
positive form. them contrariwise to serue vs in our 
• Compare what More says in his Jewdenes. And for this consideracion 
TtWJiiu t~pon 1/1, Passi011 ( Woi"Jb, dothe God much mislike lieug, for that 
T2 
(Ca. 
opinion, and that onlye 1 emong the commen people. For 
elles a parte, emong the pryestes and men of grauity, they 
doo not only suffre but also exhorte him to dispute and 
argue ; hoopinge that at the laste that madnes will giue 
place to reason. 
There be also other, and of them no small nurnbre, 
whych be not forbidden to speake their mindes, as ground­
ing their opinion vpon some reason ; being in their gliuine • 
nother euell nor vitious. Their heresye is much contrary 
to the other. For they beleue that the soules of brute 
beastes be immortall and euerlasting 1; but nothinge to be 
compared with owers in dignitie, nother ordeyned and b 
predestinate to like felicitie. For all they 3 beleue cer­
teinly and sewerly, that mans blesse shall be so greate, 
that they doo morne and lamente euerye mans sicknes, but 
no mans death ; oneles it be one whom they see depart 
from his liffe carfully, and agaynst his will. For this they 
take for a very euell token, as though the sowle, beinge 
• i.e. 
Nempe hoc I pro pessimo habent augurio, tanquam anima exspes 146 
the wordes which wer by him ordeined 
truely to expresse our myndes by, wee 
falsely peruerte to a quite contrary 
vse.' 
1 That is, the prohibition only applies 
to disputing, Bee:. t For some modern successors of 
this school, among whom it would 
seem that John Wesley must be in­
cluded, see the Rev. Edward White's 
Lift in Cltrist. 73 "· 
• That is, ' they alL' 
CH. IX.] or 9topia. 
in dyspayre and vexed in conscience, through some preuy 
and secret forefeilyng 1 of the punnishment now at hande, 
were aferde to depart. And they thinke he shall not be 
welcome to God, whyche, when he ys called, ninneth 
not 1 to hym gladly, but ys drawen by force and sore 
agaynste hys wylJ. They therfore that see thys kynde of 
deathe doo abhorre it, and them that so die they burye 
wyth sorrow and silence. And when they haue prayed 
God to be mercifull to the sowle, and mercifully to pardon 
the infirmities therof, they couer the dead coorpe with 
earth e. 
Contrarye wise, all that depart merely 8 and ful of good 
hoope, for them no man mournethe, but followethe the 
heerse with ioyfull synging, commending the soules to god 
with great affection. And at the last not with mourning 
sorrow, but with a great reuerence, they bourne the 
bodies • ; and in the same place they set vp a piller of 
ac male conscia occulto quopiam imminentis poenae praesagio 
reformidet exitum. 
1 That is,' fore-feeling,' or anticipa· 
tion. 
1 'He would farther say unto them, 
that, upon his faith, if he might per­
ceive his wife and children would 
encourage him to die in a good cause, 
it should so comfort him, that for very 
joy thereof it would make him merrily 
""' to tlftlllr.'-Roper's Lift of Mow, 
ed. 54· 
• That is, merrily. See the preced­
ing note. ' It is noticeable that More assigns 
cremation to the good, and interment 
to the bad. This would have been 
contrary to the feeling of the early 
Christians. Burial they called the 
'veterem et meliorem consuetudinem' 
(Minucius Felix, Od11v. Sulla is 
said to have been the first Rc.man of 
note who prescribed for himself the 
Greek custom of cremation. See the 
article ' Burial of the Dead' in the 
Did. 
stone, with the deade mans titles therin graued. When 
they be comme home they reherse his vertuouse maners 
and his good dedes. But no parte of his liffe is soo oft or 
gladly talked of as his mery deathe. They thinke that 
this remembraunce of their vertue and goodnes • doth 
vehementely prouoke and enforce the quicke b to vertue ; 
and that nothing can be more pleasaunt and acceptable to 
the dead; whom they suppose to he present emong them 
when they talke of them, though to the dull and feoble 
eye sight of mortall men they be inuisibly a. For it were 
an vnconuenient thinge, that the blessed shoulde not be at 
libertye to goo whether they wold. And it were a poynte 
of greate vnkyndnes in them, to haue vtterly caste awaye 
the desyer of vysytynge and seynge their frindes 1, to 
whome they were in theyr lyfe tyme ioyned by mutuall 
loue and charytye d ; whych in good men after theyre 
deathe they cownte to be rather encreasede then dy· 
mynyshede. They beleue therefore that the deade be 
presen~lye conuersaunte emong the quicke, as beholders 
and witnesses of all their woordes and deedes. Therefore 
• the vertue and soocfnes of the dead. Mortuos ergo 
uersari 1 inter uiuentes credunt, dictorum factorumque spectatores ; 14 7 
1 A dream of poets in all aga that 
' ••• As ancient sages ween, 
Departed spirits, half unseen, 
Can mincle with the mortal throng.' 1 In a copy of the edition of N ovem­
ber, 1518, which I pouess, this baa 
been altered to fll•"'; which mua.t be 
the true reading. IX.) of Utopia. 
they go more corragiously to their busines, as hauing 
a trust and affiaunce in such ouerseers. And this same 
belefe of the present conuersacion of their forefathers and 
auncetours emonge them fearethe them from all secrete 
dishonesty. 
They vtterly despise and mocke sothe sayinges and 
diuinacions of thinges to come by the flighte or voyces of 
birdes 1, and all other diuinations of vayne superstition, 
which in other countreys be in great obseruation. But 
they highly esteame and worshippe miracles, that come 
by no helpe of nature, as workes and witnesses of the 
presente powre of God 1• And such they saye doo chaunce 
there very often. And sumtimes in great and dowtefull 
matters, by commen intercession and prayers, they pro­
cure and obteyne them with a suer hoope and confidence 
and a stedfast beleffe. 
They thinke that the contemplacion of nature, and the 
eoquc; res agendas fidentius aggrediuntur, talibus uelut freti prae­
sidibus, et ab inhonesto secreto deterret eos credita maiorum prae­
senti&. 
Gratum deo cultum putant naturae contemplationem, laudemque ab 
1 From • sothe sayings ' to ' birdes' 
is all an equivalent for the single word 
augt~ria. 
• In the Dialogw toiii:Wif.Y"P Hn-r-
9"8 anti Malin'$ of R'ligion, a great 
part of the first Book (cbs. iv-xvii) is 
taken up with a discussion of the sub­
ject of miracles. More elsewhere 
draws the same distinction as in the 
text 1M-tween 'vayne superstition' and 
true miracles. The test is in their 
profitableness. 'For that is a good mark betwene Gods miracles and the 
dyuels wonders. For Christ and hys 
saintes haue their miracles alway tend­
ing to frute and profit. The dyueland 
hys wiches and necromancers, al theyr 
wonderful worltes draw to no fruteful 
end, but to a fruitelesse ostentacion 
and shew, as it were a jugler that 
woulde for a shew before the people 
plai masteries at a feast.' -Worlu, 
p. 1091 C. 
[CII. 
prayse thereof cumminge, is to God a very acceptable 
honour. Yet there be many so earnestly bent and affec­
tioned to religion, that they passe no thinge for learning, 
nor giue their min des to no • knowledge of thinges. But 
ydelnes they vtterly forsake and eschue, thinkinge felicitie 
after this liffe to be gotten and obteined by busy labors 
and good exercises 1• Some therfore of them attende vpon 
the sicke, some amend highe waies, dense ditches, repaire 
bridges, digge turfes, grauell, and stones, fell and cleaue 
woode, bring wood, come, and other thinges into the 
cities in cartes, and serue not onlye in commen woorkest 
but also in pryuate laboures, as seruantes, yea, more then 
bondmen. For what so euer vnplesaunte, harde, and vile 
worke is any where, from the which labour, lothsumnes, 
and desperation doth fraye other, all that they take vpon 
them willingly and gladly; procuring quyete and rest to 
other; remayning in continuall woorke and labour them-
• any. 
1 .More may have been thinking, 
when he wrote this, of the ' Brethren 
of the Common Life,' at whose school 
in Deventer the early years of Eras­
mus were passed. They ' differed 
from the mendicant orders in the fact 
that they did not beg, but, on the con­
trary, maintained themselves by manual ' labour, having at least a partial com­
munity of goods, and distinguished 
generally by their strict live!! and fer­
vent devotion.'- Drummond : Enum,., 
1873. IX.] of Utopia. 281 
selfes; not embrayding others there wyth. They nother 
reproue other mens liues, nor glorye in theire owne. 
Thies men, the more seruiseable 1 they behaue them 
selfes, the moore they be honoured of all men. 
Yet they be diuided into ii. The one is of them 
that liue single and chast, absteining not only from the 
company of women, but al so from the • eating of flesh, 
and some of them from al maner of beastes 11• Which, 
vtterly reiectynge the pleasures of this present lyffe as 
hurtefull, be all hollye set vpon the dessire of the lyffe 
to come; by watchynge and sweatynge hoping shortely 
to obtaine it, beyng in the meane season meerye and 
lustye. The other sect is no lesse desyerous of labour, 
but they embrace matrimony; not despising the solace 
therof; thinking that they can not be discharged of theire 
• the ollfillftl. Nullam 
1 Not serviceable, in our sense, but 
' as servants,' or slaves. Burnet has : 
' by their stooping to such servile 
Employments, they are ••. the more 
esteemed,' &c. 
• ' Beastes ' here, as a rendering of 
ammaliNm, is a more extensive term 
than 'Oesh ' (rt~rtliMM) ; just as INstia 
in Latin may include fowl or fish. 
Hence the meaning is that, while some 
abstained from all that we should call 
butcher's meat, oth~rs abstained even 
from 'white· meats • as well, and wen: 
absolute vegetarians. A1J an example of the former may be taken the rule of 
the Carthusians of Shene : ' For yuur 
diet, it is a perpetual! abstinence from 
Oesh, in so much that in the greatest 
or most dangerous sicknes you can 
expect no dispensation therein : also 
a good parte of the yeare wee abstaine 
from all whitmeates, as in Advent, 
Lent, and all the Fridayes of the 
yeare ... • Fo,.,ulan Carlhusia~UWNm, 
Lansdowne MSS., No. 
The practice of St. Benedict himself 
was an example of the latter, and still 
more austere, practice. 
bounden duetyes towardes nature withoute labour and 
tiole, nor towardes their natiue countreye, wythowte. pro· 
creacion of chyldren. They abstayne from no pleasure 
that dothe nothynge hynder them from laboure. They 
loue the fleshe of fourefoted beastes, bycause they beleue 
that by that meate they be made hardier and stronger to 
woorke 1• The Vtopians count this secte the wiser, but 
the other the hollier. Which, in that they preferre single 
liffe before matrimony, and that sharpe liffe before an 
easier liffe, if herin they grounded vpon reason, they wold 
mock. them ; but now, forasmuch as they say they be 
ledde to it by religion, they honour and worship them 2• 
And thies be they whome in .their language by a peculyare 
name they call Buthrescas 3, the whyche woorde by in· 
terpretation signifieth to vs men of religion, or religious men. 
They haue pryestes of exceding holli~es, and therefore 
uoluptatem refugiunt, quae nihil eos ab Iabore demoretur. neque 
1 The language of right reason, and 
justified, with proper qualifications, by 
St. In the D1 qualuor 
"ouissl"mis 1 towards the end, More has 
much on the text ' meats for the belly, 
and the belly for meats ; but God will 
destroy both it and them.' In the 
present passage he gives due weight 
to the words that precede that text, 
' all things are lawful for me.' Compare 
Luther's Tab/1 Talj, ed. 1 The next sentence in the Latin 
is omitted by Robynson. Burnet ren­
ders it: • There is nothing in which 
they are more cautious, than in giving 
their Opinion positively concerning 
any Sort of Religion.' 
1 The word, as More himself ex­
plains its meaning just after, is evi· 
dently formed to express • very 
devout,' as if 1JoellfW1t1ttos, on the 
analogy of llotitra". 
very few 1• For there be but xiii. 1 in euery city, according 
to the number of theire churches, sauynge when they go 
furth to battell. For than vii. of them goo furthe wyth 
the armye: in whose steades so manye newe be made at 
home. But the other, at theyre retourne home, agayn 
reentre euery one into his own place. They that be 
aboue the numbre, vntyll suche tyme as they succede 
into the places of the other at theyre dyinge, be in the 
meane season continuallye in companye wyth the bishoppe. 
For he ys the chyeffe heade of them all. They be chosen 
of the people as the other magistrates be, by secrete 
voices for the a-8 ••• they be consecrate of their owne 
company. They be ouerseers of all deuyne matters, or­
derers of religions, and as it were jugers and maisters of 
maners. And it is a great dishonestye and shame to be 
rebuked or spoken to by anny of them for dissolate and 
incontinent liuing. 
1 There is probably a touch of satire 
in this, but not of necessity, since 
those who are 'ximii in any qualifica­
tions will naturally be few. More 
censures Dorp for making a similar 
remark about the bishops of his time : 
-'quorum, ut sun! certe nonnulli tanto 
digni fastigio, ita mira ul pauciltu.' 
Lucumtionn, p. 
1 Perhaps with refenonce to the thirteen apostles. See, for instances 
of such choice of numbers, the Rev. Blunt's Introduction to the 
Myroun of oun LtJd~, 1873• p. 
• A line is here omitted in the 
· edition of 1551 between the first 
syllable of ' auoydinge ' and ' they 
be consecrate.' The eeL of 1556 
supplies it : ' uoyding of strife. After 
their election '. 
£be seconn 15ofle [Cx. 
But as it is their offyce to gyue good exhortations and 
cownsell, so it is the deuty of the prince and the other 
magistrates to correct and punnyshe offenders ; sauynge 
that the priestes, whome 1 they find exceading vicious 
liuers, them they excommunicate from hauing any interest 
in diuine matters. And there is almoost no punnishment 
emonge them more feared. For they runne in verye 
great infamy, and be inwardly tormented with a secrete 
feare of religion, and shall not long scape free with their 
bodies. For onles they, by quycke repentaunce approue 
the amendement of their lyffes to the priestes, they be 
taken and punnished of the cownsell as wycked and irre· 
ligious 11• 
Both childhode and youth is instructed, and tought of 
them. Nor they be not more deligente to instructe them 
in learning then in vertue and good maners. For they 
vse with very greate endeuour and deligence to put into 
the heades of their children, whiles they be yet tender 
and pliaunt, good opinions and profitable for the conser-
Caeterum ut hortari atque admonere lllorum est, ita eoereere atque 
in facinorosos animaduertere prineipis atque aliorum est magistra­
tuum ; nisi quod saeris interdieunt, quos improbe malos eomperiunt : 
nee ullum fere supplieium est quod horreant magis. namque summam adhibent indus­
triam, ut bonas protenus opiniones et eonseruandae ipsorum reipub-
1 Burnet brings out the sense more 
clearly : 'The severest thing that the 
Priest does, is the ell.cluding those 
that are desperately wicked from join­
ing in their worship.' 
1 Lat. 
This was a being delivered over to the secular arm. But it does not touch 
the subject of punishment for religious 
opinions, as those only are spoken of 
here as being seized by the council, 
whom the priests have pronounced to 
be impi"'O¥ malos. IX.) of Utopia. 
uation of their weale publique. Which, when they be 
ones rooted in children, do remayne wyth them all their 
lyfe after, and be wonders profitable for the defence and 
maintenaunce of the state of the commen wealthe ; which 
neuer decaieth, but through vicis risinge of euell opinyons. 
The pryestes, onles they be women 1 (for that kynd is 
not excluded from pryesthode ; howebeit fewe be chosen, 
and none but widdowes and old women): the men priestes, 
I saye, take to their wifes 1 the chief est women in all their 
countreye. Neque enim ulli apud Vtopienses magistratui maior habetur 
1 It would be bard to say whether 
this is a mere jn4 rJ' nprit, or whether 
More had any more serious thought in 
making women eligible for the priest­
hood in UtopiL He may have bad in 
his mind the greater natural devout­
ness of their sex, as Cicero had when 
be wrote to Terentia: 'Neque dii, 
quos tu castissime coluisti, neque 
homines, quibus ego semper servivi, 
nobis gratiam retulerunt.' (Epp. Or perhaps, with daugh 
ters educated as were his own, often 
discussing at home the homilies they 
beard in church, it may have been 
jestingly remarked that one of them 
would be better qualified to discharge 
the teaching office, at least, of the 
priesthood than some of the preachers 
on whom he is occasionally so severe. 
But when he thought that a playful 
suggestion was in danger of being 
advocated in earnest, More could 
become bitterly contemptuous. 'For 
hys heresye,' he writes, referring to Tyndall, ' rekeneth euerye woman a 
prest, and as able to say masse as 
euer was saynte Peter. And in good 
faytbe, as for suche masses as he 
woulde haue sayde • . • I wene a 
woman were in dede a more mete 
priest than saynt Peter.'-Fifth Boolt 
of tire Conful~~eitm : Worlls, p. 
1 In the Supplicaci'on of Sautes 
(Wor.i.f, p. 308), when writing of the 
existing priesthood of the Church, 
bound to celibacy, More's language is 
in violent contrast to that used in the 
text. The marginal note : ' Tboe 
mariage of priestes is incestuouse,' 
is a very mild summary of the passage. 
Elsewhere (ib. 485), speaking of 
the celibacy of priests as an abstract 
principle, he admits that ' the churche 
both knoweth and confesseth, that 
wedlocke and priesthod be not repug­
nant but compstible of their nature, 
and that wedded men baue been 
made priestes and kept styli theyr 
wiues.' 
286 [CR. In so much that if they 
committ any offence, they be vnder no commen iudge­
ment, but be left only to god and themselfes 1• For they 
thinke it not lawfull to touch him with mannes hande, be 
he neuer so vityous, whiche after so singuler a sort was 
dedicate and consecrate to god as a holly offering. This 
maner may they easely obserue, bicause they haue so few 
priestes, and do chuse them with such circumspection. 
For it scasely euer 2 chaunceth that the most vertuous 
emong vertuous, which in respect only of his vertue is 
auaunced to so high a dignity, can fal to vice and wicked· 
nes. And if it should chaunce in dede (as mans nature 
is mutable and fraile), yet by reason they be so few a and 
honos, usque adeo ut si quid etiam flagitii admiserint, nullo 
publico iudicio subsint: deo tantum ac sibi relinquuntur. et si iam maxime contingeret, ut est mortalium 
natura mutabilis, tamen qua sunt paucitate, nee ulla praeter 
1 We may infer from this, which 
side More would have been likely to 
take in the great controversy lately 
stirred between the two parties of 
which Staudish and Kidderminster 
were the representatives. The text 
noli tanK"Y Clrrislos nt«>S ex pressed 
the view of the Abbot of Winchcombe. 
See Brewer's R""gn of Hntry VIII, 
i. Colet, in his Convocation 
Sermon, delivered in 15111, gives a 
guarded assent to the same view :­
' Y e wyll haue the churches liberte,' 
he says to the assembled clergy • and 
nat be drawen afore secular iuges : 
and that also is ryght. For hit is in the psalmes : Touclt y. nat '"-"'" 
a~toynt~ti. But if ye desire this liberte. 
first vnlouse your selfe frome the world· 
lye bondage, and from the seruices of 
men ; and lyfte vp your selfe in to the 
trewe lybertie, the spirituall lybertye 
of Christe, in to grace from synnes ; 
and serue you God, and raygne in 
hym. And than, beleue me, the 
people wyll nat touche the anoynted 
of theyr Lordc: God.' , 
' Lat. '"'I'" """,..• • it does not 
lightly chance.' 
1 The sarcastic marginal note to 
the Latin, at this point, should be 
observed. IX.] Of Utopia. 
promoted to no might nor powre, but only honour ·, it 
were not to be feared that anye great dammage by them 
should happen and ensue to the commen wealth. They 
haue so rare and few priestes, least, if the honour were 
communicate to many, the dignity of the ordre, which 
emong them now is so highly estemed, should runne in 
contempt; speciallye bicause they thinke it harde to find 
many so good, as to be meet for that dignity, to the execu· 
tion and discharge wherof it is not sufficiente to be endued 
with mean vertues. 
Furthennore, thies priestes be not more estemed of 
their owne countrey men, then they be of forrein and 
straung countreis. Which thing maye hereby plainly 
appere. And I think al so that this is the cause of it. 
For ~hiles the annes be fighting together in open feld, 
they a Iitle beside, not farre of, knele vpon their knees in 
their hallowed vestimentes, holding vp theyr handes to 
heauen ; praying first of all for peace, nexte for vyctory 
of theyr owne parte, but to neyther part a bluddy vyc· 
tory 1• If their host gette the vpper hand, they runne in 
a to honour. uincentibus suis decurrunt in aciem, sae-
1 The picture drawn is more sug· 
gellift ol111Reea pnaying on the mount during the battle against the Amalek· 
ilea (Exod. 1a), than of the con· 
288 ([be ~econb 15olte (C11.IX. 
to the mayne battayle, and restrayne theyre owne men 
from sleying and cruellye pursuynge theyre vanquyshed 
ennemies. \Vhyche ennemyes, yf they do but see them 
and speake to them, yt ys ynoughe for the sauegarde of 
theyr lyues ; and the towchynge of theire cloth'es defend­
eth and saueth al their gooddes from rauyne and spoyle. 
Thys thing hath auaunced them to so greate wourshyp 
and trew maiesty emong al natonis •, that many times they 
haue aswel preserued theire own citizens from the cruel 
force of their ennemies, as they haue their enemies from 
the ·furyous rage of theyre owne men. For yt ys well 
knowen that when their owne army bathe reculed, and in 
dyspayre turned backe, and runne away, theyr ennemies 
fyerslye pursuing with slaughter and spoyle, then the 
priestes cumming betwene haue stayed the murder, and 
parted bothe the hostes ; so that peace hath bene made 
• i. With his abhorrence of 
war between Christian princes (one of 
the three evils, to secure the abohtion 
of which he would gladly have been 
• put in a sack and presently cast into 
the Thames') More would not look 
with a kindly eye on the martial 
energy of Pope Julius II, • more like 
to that Caesar, whose Name bee bare, 
then Peter, from whom he would faine 
deriue his Succession,' or on the cam­
paigns directed by Ximenes, in whom • the spirit of the soldier burned strong 
and bright under his monastic weeds.' 
Even to prelates like those who fell 
at Flodden, fighting simply as brave 
soldiers for their country-the Arch· 
bishop of St. Andrew's, the Bishops 
of Caithness and of the Isles, the 
Abbots of Inchaff'ray and Kilwinnin!f, 
and others-while his sympathy would 
be with them as patriots, the descrip­
tion in the text would serve as a silent 
reproach.- See Roper's Lift, p. 
and concluded betwene bothe partes vpon equall and 
indyfferent condytions. For there was neuer anny natyon 
so fiers, so cruell and rude, but they hadde them in suche 
reuerence, that they cownted theyr bodyes hallowed and 
sanctyfyed, and therefore not to be violentlye and vnreuer­
entlye towched. 
They kepe hollye daye • the fyrste and the laste day 
of euerye moneth and yeare, deuydynge the yeare into 
monethes ; whyche they measure by the course of the 
moone, as they doo the yeare by the course of the sonne. 
The fyrste dayes they call in theyr language Lynemernes 1, 
and the laste Trapememes; the whyche woordes maye be 
interpreted primifeste and finifest ; or els, in our speache, 
first feast and last feast. 
Their churches be very gorgyous, and not onelye of 
• daye omiltttl. 
Delubra uisuntur egregia, utpote non operosa modo, sed, quod 
1 Why Robynson should give the 
word in this form, when the Latin 
texts have uniformly C_ytUmn'ffos, is 
not clear. Possibly he had a notion 
that More must have been thinking of 
Lama, as a suitable element in hi.'l 
Imaginary name for the first day of 
the month, and that Cyrtmrn'ffos was 
thus a misprinL It is more likely that 
the word ia meant to suggest ltW· 
"'iUP'"'"• ' the dog's day of the month,' 
u strictly the night between the old 
and new, when food was placed out 
at the cross-roads, and the barking 
of the dogs was taken as a sign 
of the approach of Hecate. See 
Theocr. So in like 
manner 'tfi411·"11A'P'"3r would express 
the turning or closing day of the 
month. 
fyne and curious workemanship, but also (which in the 
fewenes of them was necessary) very wyde and large, and 
able to receaue a great company of people. But they be 
all sumwhat darke. Howbeit, that was not donne through 
ignoraunce in buylding, but as they say by the cownsell of 
the priestes. Bicause they thought that ouer much light 
doth disperse mens cogitations ; where as in dimme and 
doutefull lighte 1 they be gathered together, and more 
earnestly fixed vpon religion and deuocion. Which hi­
cause it is not there of one sort emong all men; and yet all 
the kindes and fassions of it, t~oughe they be sondry and 
manifold, agree together in the honoure of the deuine 
nature, as going diuers wayes to one ende ; therfore no­
thing is sene nor hard in the churches, which • semeth 
not to agre indifferently with them all. If there be a dis­
tinct kind of sacrifice, peculiare to any seuerall secte, that 
they execute at home in their owne houses. The common 
sacrifices be so ordered, that they be no derogatyon nor 
preiudyce to annye of the pryuate sacryfyces and reli­
gions». 
• but that. 
1 This will at once recall the • dim religious light' of II PmM~WD. A little 
less familiar may be tlJe couplet from Pope"s Eloistl to .AMiard:-
• Where awful arches make a noon-day night, 
And tlJe dim windows shed a solemn light.' 
1 Compare what More aays just afterwards about the public: prayers. 291 
Therefore no ymage of annye god is seene in the 
churche ; to the intente it maye be free for euery man 
to conceyue god by their religion after what likenes and 
similitude they will. They call vpon no peculiar name of 
god, but only Mithra 1• In the which word they all agree 
together in one nature of the deuine maiestye, whatsoeuer 
it be. No prayers be vsed, but such as euerye man maye 
boldelye pronownce wythowt the offending of anny secte. 
They come therefore to the churche the laste day of 
euery moneth and yeare, in the euenynge, yet fastyng, 
there to gyue thanckes to God for that they haue pros­
perouslye passed ouer the yeare or monethe, wherof that 
hollye daye ys the laste daye. The next daye they come 
to the churche earlye in the mornyng, to praye to God that 
they maye haue good fortune and successe all the newe 
yeare or monethe, whyche they doo begynne of that same 
hollye daye. But in the holly dayes that be the laste 
dayes of the monethes and yeares, before they come to 
the churche, the wiffes fall downe prostrat before their 
husbandes feete at home ; and the children before the feete 
of their parentes ; confessing and acknowleginge that they 
Itaque nulla deorum effigies in templo conspicitur, quo liberum 
cuique sit qua forma deum uelut e summa religione concipere. At in finifestis, antea quam templum petunt, u:r.ores domi 
ad uirorum pedes, liberi ad parentum prouoluti, peccasse fatentur 
1 The Persian name for the Sun· 
god. See above, p. 1167, and comp. 5, i 53· For the way in which More makes the old Utopian 
language to be connected with the 
Penian, see p. 
haue offended " other by some actuall dede, or by omis­
sion of their dewty, and desire pardon f~r their offence 1• 
Thus yf a.nye cloude of preuy displeasure was risen at 
home, by this satisfaction it is ouer blowen ; that they 
may be present at the sacrifices with pure and charitable 
mindes 11• For they be aferd to come there with troubled 
consciences. Therefore, if they knowe themselfes to 
beare anye hatred or grudge towardes anye man 3, they 
presume not to come to the sacrifices before they haue 
reconcyled themselfes and purged theyre conscyences, for 
feare of greate vengeaunce and punyshemente for their 
offence. 
When they come thyther, the men goo into the ryghte 
syde of the churche, and the the b women into the left 
syde '· There they place' themselfes m suche ordre that 
• [that .•. offended) themselfes offenders. aftectibus ad sacrificia non ingerunt sese, uindictae 
celeris magnaeque metu. The author of PltilomorHs sees in 
this a possible slight put upon the 
practice of confession to the priest 
alone (and ed., p. 
But, as he justly says, ' the Utopia 
cannot be referred to as containing 
the writer's settled opinion upon the 
subjects which are introduced.' 
1 With the severe tone of the Latin 
marginal note here, compare the apo· 
strophe into which Colet breaks out, in 
his Tr•ati#s o" tit• Hinarrlties, p. 90· 
1 The reader will note the similarity between this and a passage in the 
rubric before the Communion Service 
in the Boolr. of Common Prayer: ' The 
same order shall the Curate use with 
those betwixt whom he pen:eiveth 
malice and hatred to reign ; not suf­
fering them to be partalr.ers of the 
Lord's Table, until he know them to 
be reconciled.' 
• This custom of the separation of 
the sexes in Christian Churches is at 
least as old as the Apostolicrll C•­
stitutitms. Besides its being the com-
Ca. IX.] Of Utopia. 293 
all they which be of the male kind in euery houshold sitte 
before the goodman of the house ; and they of the female 
kynde before the goodwyfe, Thus it is forsene 1 that all 
their gestures and behauiours be marked and obserued 
abrode of them, by whose aucthoritye and discipline they 
be gouerned at home. This also they diligentlye see 
vnto, that the yonger euermore be coupled with his elder ; 
lest, if children be • ioyned together, they shold passe 
ouer that time in childish wantonnes, wherin they ought 
principallye to conceaue a religious and deuout feere 
towardes god; which is the chieffe and almost the only 
incitation to vertue. 
They kill no liuing beast in sacrifice, nor they thinke 
not that the mercifull clemency of god hath delite in bloud 
and slaughter; which hath geuen liffe to beastes, to the 
intent they should liue. They burne franckensence and 
other sweet sauours 2, and light also a great numbre of 
• [if ••• be) children bcinge. Thus incendunt et alia item odoramenta. 
moo practice in his own time, More 
may have noticed the allusion to it in 
St. Augustine, when lecturing on the 
IN Civi/4" (Lib. 
1 Dionysius Pseudo-Areopagita is 
said to be the earliest writer who testifies to the ritual use of incense in 
churches. Colet, in his abstract of 
the Hin'tlnlrin (Ld. t 3), 
droLws out the ~rymbolical meauing, 
that the sweet odour of incense • is 
a sign of the Almighty's fragrant love.' 
• This assuredly,' he says, 'the fuming 
of incense, beginning fl"om the altar, 
aud thence proceeding through the 
whole temple, aud returning to the 
294 [C•. 
waxe candelles and tapers 1 ; nott supposinge this geere to 
be any thing auaylable to the diuine nature, as nother the 
prayers of men ; but this vnhurtfull and harmeles kind of 
worship pleaseth them. And by thies sweet sauoures, 
and lightes, and other such ceremonies, men feele them­
selfes secretly lifted vp, and encouraged to deuotion, with 
more willynge and feruent hartes. The people weareth 
in the churche white apparell : the priest is clothed in 
chaungeable coloures, whiche in workemanshyp be excel­
lent, but in stuffe not verye pretious. For theire veste­
mentes be nother embrodered with golde, nor set with 
precious stones ; but they be wrought so fynely and con­
nyng]y with diuers fetheres of fowles 2, that the estima­
cion of no costelye stuffe is able to counteruaile the price 
haec ce:reos numerosos praeferunt, non quod haec nesciant nihil ad 154 
diuinam conferre naturam, quippe ut nee ipsas hominum preces, sed 
et innoxium colendi genus placet, et hiis odoribus luminibusque, ac 
caeteris etiam ceremoniis, nescio quomodo sese sentiunt homines 
erigi, atque in dei cultum animo alacriore consurgere. neque enim 
auro intextae, aut raris coagmentatae lapidibus, sed diuersis auium 
plumis tam scite tantoque artificio laboratae sunt, ut operis precium 
place whence it set forth, signifies in 
sacred and solemn manner to the 
unlearned ; that herein, if they are 
able, they may perceive that sweet· 
smelling grace is diffused far and wide 
over all from the high place of God.' 
1 For the profusion of wax candles 
and tapers which would meet the eye 
in St. Paul's Cathedral, see Dr. 7+ Their plenty may have been 
in part a cause of Dean Colet's 
well-known ordinance for his newly­
founded school. 
1 More's selection of this fanciful 
apparel for his priests may have been 
in pure whim, or in the endeavour to find something totally different from 
existing customs. But the thought 
may possibly have been suggested to 
him by the study of his favourite Plato. 
In the TimtuUs the race of birds is 
created out of ' innocent, light-minded 
men, who thought to pursue the study 
of the heavens by sight : these were 
transformed into birds, and grew 
feathers instead of hair.'-See Pro­
fessor Jowett's Introduction to the 
TimtUUS (Plato, 1871, ii. What 
Socrates says also i.n the PlttUdo, § 85, 
about birds having a prophetic gift 
from Apollo, and singing for joy but 
never for sorrow, deserves to be com· 
pared. 295 
of the worke. Furthermore, in thies hirdes fethers, and in 
the dewe ordre of them, whiche is obserued in theire set­
tyng, they saye is conteyned certayn deuyne misteries ; 
the interpretation wherof knowen, whiche is diligentlye 
tawght by the priestes, they be put in remembraunce of 
the bountyfull benefites of God towarde them, and of the 
loue and honoure whiche of theire behalfe is dewe to God, 
and also of theire dewties one towarde an other. 
When the priest first commeth out of the vestrie, thus 
apparelled, they fall downe incontinent euery one reue­
rently to the grounde, with so styli silence on euery part, 
that the very fassion of the thinge striketh into them a 
certayne feare of God, as though he were there personally 
presente. When they haue lien a little space on the 
grounde, the priest giueth them a signe for to ryse. Then 
they sing prayses vnto God, whiche they intermixt with 
instrumentes of musick, for the moste parte of other 
fassions then thies that we vse in this parte of the worlde. 
And like as some of owrs bee muche sweter then theirs, 
so some of theirs doo farre passe owrs 1• But in one 
nullius aestimatio materiae fuerit aequatura. Verum 
1 More, who used often to don a 
surplice, and sing in the choir at Chelsea, was well qualified to express 
an opinion on this subject. It seems 
Ql:be seconb 15oke [Ca. 
thynge dowteles they goo excedinge farre beyond vs. 
For all theire musicke, both that they playe vpon instru­
mentes, and that they singe with mans voyse, doth so 
resemble and expresse naturall affections ; the sownd and 
tune is so applied and made agreable to the thynge ; that 
whether it bee a prayer, or els a dytty of gladnes, of 
patience, of trouble, of mournynge, or of anger, the 
fassion of the melodye dothe so represente the meaning 
of the thing, that it doth wonderfullye moue, stire, pearce, 
and enflame the hearers myndes 1• 
una in re baud dubie Iongo nos interuallo praecellunt; quod omnis 
eorum musica, siue quae personator organis, siue quam uoce modu­
lantur humana, ita naturales affectus imitatur et exprimit, ita sonus 
accommodatur ad rem ; seu deprecantis oratio sit, seu laeta, placa­
bilis, turbida, lugubris, irata; ita rei sensum quendam melodiae forma 
repraesentat, ut animos auditorum mirum in modum afficiat, penetret, 
incendat. 
clear, from more than one contempo· 
rary account, that the church music 
of the day, at least in England, had 
become too elaborate and artificial, the 
sound leaving the sense far behind. 
Thus Polydore Vergil complains that 
' our syngers cry out so loude, that 
we heare nothing saue a noyse, and 
those that be present cannot be edified 
with the word.' ' It were great fur­
therance to religion,' he adds, 'yf 
those singers, not far unlike to )ayes, 
wer ether banished out of the Temples, 
or els their singing wer so modified 
with more sobemesse, that the wordes 
might be understande, to thedifying 
of the laytie.'- Thomas Langley's 
Abridgrmnlll of tiN Notah/, Work' of 
Polidon V1rgil, s. Com­
pare what Erasmus says in the 1R 
&aninu/4 E«le&iM r:o11col'riia : 'Si non 
placet in templis iUud modulatae musi­
cae genus, et organorum cantus, pos­
sunt citra pietatis jacturam omitti : 
Si placet, curandum est ut ilia quoque musica sit digna templo Dei'; and the 
striking passage which occurs in his 
note on I Cor. 19 in the AIIIIO· 
tatitme& :-' In sacram aedem uelut in 
theatrum concurritur, ad deliniendas 
aurcs ..• Haec adeo placent, ut mo­
nachi nihil aliudagant, praesertim apud 
Britannos ; et quorum cantus debuit 
esse luctus, hi lasciuis hinnitibus et 
mobili gutture Deum placari credunt.' 
1 Richard Pace, whose own skill in 
music had commended him as a boy 
to the notice of Thomas Langton, 
Bishop of Winchester, gives a high 
place in his IR FrlldN to that art, 
which teaches men ' et orare bene et 
concionari' (ed. But the 
best commentary on what More has 
written in the text is furnished by some 
sensible remarks of Erasmus towards 
the end of his Chri&titmi Matri,.tmii 
lmlituhl'" (a treatise which he dedi­
cated to Queen Katharine). After 
complaining of the licentious tone of 
much secular ballad-music, especially 
Ca. '297 
At the laste the people and the priest together rehearse 
solempne prayers in woordes, expresslye pronounced 1; 
so made that euerye man may priuatelye applye to hym­
selfe that which is commonlye spoken of all2• In thies 
prayers euerye man recogniseth and knowledgeth God to 
be hys maker, hys gouernoure, and the principal cause of 
all other goodnes ; thankyng him for so many benefites 
receaued at hys hande: but namelye, that through the 
fauoure of God he hath chaunced into that publyque weale, 
whiche is moste happye and welthye, and hath chosen 
that religion whyche he hopeth to be moste true. In the 
whyche thynge yf he doo annye thynge erre, or yf there 
bee annye other better then eyther of them is, beynge 
moore acceptable to GOD, he desiereth hym that he wyll 
Solennes ad ultimum conceptis uerbis preces sacerdos pariter 
populusque percensent, ita compositas ut quae simul cuncti recitant, 
priuatim quisque ad semet referat. 
in the Low Countries, he urges, in 
words like those of More, the power 
of music for good or evil: • Numerosi 
illi soni magnam uim habent ad aftici­
endos hominum animos, in tantum ut 
quidam hinc collegerint ipsam animam 
esse harmoniam, aut certe habere har­
moniam, nam simile simili delectari ' 
(ed. He goes on to 
censure the style of music introduced 
into divine worship. Nunc sonis 
nequissimis aptantur uerba sacra.' 
1 Burnet, more correctly,' in a set 
Form of Words.' 
• See above, p. ~-Erasmus 
often pleads for the like simple and 
comprehensive formulas. • Adferamus 
fidei professionem simplicem, vereque 
Apostolicam,' he says, speaking of the 
efforts to convert the Turks, • •.. 
of hys goodnes let hym haue knowledge thereof, as one 
that is readye too followe what waye soeuer he wyllleade 
hym. But yf thys forme and fassion of a commen wealthe 
be beste, and his owne religion moste true and perfecte, 
then he desyreth God to gyue him a constaunte sted­
fastnes in the same, and to brynge all other people to 
the same ordre of lyuyng, and to the same opinion of 
God ; onles there be any thynge that in this dyuersitie of 
religions doth delyte his vnsearcheable pleasure. To be 
shorte, he prayeth hym that after his deathe he may come 
to hym 1 ; but how soone or late, that he dare not assygne 
or determine. Howebeit, if it myght stande with his 
maiesties pleasure, he would be muche gladder to dye a 
paynfull dethe and so to go to God, then by long lyuing in 
worldlye prosperytie to bee awaye from hym. Whan this 
prayer is sayde, they fall downe to the ground agayne, 
and a lytle after they ryse vp and go to dynner. And the 
resydewe of the daye they passe ouer in playes, and 
exercise of cheualrye 2• 
approbet, orare se eius bonitas efficiat hoc ut ipse cognoscat: paratum 
enim sequi se qua qua uersus ab eo ducatur. 
1 Robynson neglects the fame in the 
Latin. Burnet is more correct. ' Then 
they pray that God may give them an 
easy Passage at last to himself.' 
• Jt was one of the reforms peti· 
tioned for by the Cardinal of Cambray at the <.:ouncil of Constance, that on 
festivals, all but Sundays and the 
majoJTs fmae, the lay people might 
be allowed, when divine service was 
over, to return to worlr. IX.] of lttopta. 299 
N owe I haue declared and descrybyd vnto yowe, as 
truely as I coulde, the fourme and ordre of that commen 
wealth, which verely in my iudgement is not onlye the 
beste, but also that whiche alone of good ryght may 
clayme and take vpon it the name of a common wealthe 
or publique weale. For in other places they speake stil 
of the commen wealth ; but euerye man procureth hys 
owne pryuatewealthe•. Here where nothynge is pryuate, 
the commen affayres be earnestly loked vpon. And 
truely on both partes they haue good cause so to do as 
they do. For in other countreys who knoweth not that 
he shall sterue for honger, onles he make some seuerall 
prouision for hymself, though the commen wealthe 
floryshe neuer so muche in ryches? And therefore he is 
compelled, euen of verye necessitie, to haue regarde to 
hym selfe rather then to the people, that is to saye, to 
other. Contrarywyse, there where all thynges be commen 
to euerye man, it is not to be dowted 1 that any man shal 
lacke anye. thynge necessarye for hys pryuate vses, so 
that the commen store howses and barnes be sufficientlye 
a gaine. '­
Fascind~~& rn-wm upnmtl., &c., rsss, 
Col. 
1 That is, feared. For there nothynge is distrybuted after a nyggyshe 
sorte, nother there is any poore man or begger. And 
though no man haue any thynge, yet euerye man is ryche. 
For what can be more ryche then to lyue ioyfullye and 
merylye without all griefe and pensifenes ; not caryng for 
hys owne lyuing, nor vexed or trowbled with hys wyfes 
importunate complayntes, not • drydynge pouertie to his 
so nne, nor sorrowyng for his dowghters dowrey? Yea, 
they take no care at all for the lyuyng and wealthe of 
themsefes 1 and all theirs; of theire wyfes, theire chyl­
dren, theire nephewes 2, theire childrens chyldren, and all 
the succession that euer shall followe in theire posteritie. 
And yet, besydes thys, there is no lesse prouision for 
them that were ones labourers, and be nowe weake and 
impotent, then for them that do nowe laboure and take 
payne. 
Heere nowe woulde I see yf anye man dare be so bolde, 
as to compare with thys equytie the iustice of other nations. 
Among whom, I forsake God 3, if I can fynde imy signe 
• nor. Quid quod nihilo minus his prospicitur, qui nunc impotes 
olim laborauerunt, quam his qui nunc laborant? 
Hie aliquis uelim cum hac aequitate audeat aliarum iustitiam gen­
tium comparare, apud quas dispeream si ullum prorsus comperio 
1 The printing being indistinct, it is 
not clear whether this or 'themseles' 
is the word. 
• In the old sense of' nephews,' as 
in 1 Tim. 4· The Latin terms used are those for the successive stages iD 
lineal descent. Compare the language 
of Bud~. 'may I perish, if,' &c. 301 
or token of equitie and iustice. For what iustice is this, 
that a ryche goldsmythe 1 or an vsurer, or, to be shorte, 
any of them, whyche other doo nothyng at all ; or els that 
whiche they do is suche, that it is not very necessary 
to the commen wealthe ; should haue a pleasaunt and 
a welthy lyuynge, other by Idilnes, or by vnnecessary 
busynes ? when in the meane tyme poore labourers, 
carters, yronsmythes, carpenters, and plowmen, by so 
great and continual toyle, as drawynge and bearyng 
beastes be skeant able to susteine; and agayn so neces· 
sary toyle that with out it no commen wealth were able to 
continewe and endure one yere ; do a yet get so harde 
and poore a lyuing, and lyue so wretched and miserable 
a lyfe, that the state and condition of the labouring beastes 
maye seme muche better and welthier. For they be not 
put to so contynuall laboure, nor theire lyuynge is not 
muche worse ; yea, to them much pleasaunter; takynge 
no thowghte in the meane season for the tyme to come. 
But thies seilie poore wretches be presently tormented 
• should. At hos et labor sterilis atque infructuosus in 
1 We should now rather say, a 
banker. It was not till the Restora­
tion that banking became a distinct 
occupation in England. And this new 
branch of business, as Macaulay says, 
' naturally fell into the hands of the goldsmiths, who were accustomed to 
traffic largely in the precious metals, 
and who had vaults in which great 
masses of bullion could be secure from 
fire and from robbers.' Hist. of EHg­
lantJ, ed. 
with barreyne and vnfrutefull labour. And the remem· 
braunce of theire poore. For theire dayly wages is so lytle that it 
will not suffice for the same daye ; muche lesse it yeldeth 
any ouerplus, that may dayly be layde vp for the relyefe 
of olde age. 
Is not thys an vniust and an vnkynd publyque weale, 
whyche gyueth great fees and rewardes to gentelmen, as 
they call them, and to goldsmythes 1, and to suche other, 
whiche be other ydell persones or els onlye flatterers, and 
deuysers of vayne pleasures ; and, of the contrary parte, 
maketh no gentle prouision for poore plowmen, coliars, 
laborers, carters, yronsmythes, and carpenters ; without 
whome no com men wealth can continewe? But when • 
it hath abused the laboures oft heire lusty and flowringe 
age, at the laste, when they be oppressed with old age and 
syckenes, being nedye, poore, and indigent of all thynges; 
then, forgettynge theire so many paynfull watchynges, 
not remembrynge theire so many and so great benefytes; 
recompenseth and acquyteth them moste vnkyndly with 
myserable death. And yet besides this the riche men not 
• after. 303 
only by priuate fraud, but also by commen Iawes, do euery 
day plucke and snatche away from the poore some parte 
of their daily liuing. So, where as it semed before uniuste 
to recompense with vnkyndnes their paynes that haue 
bene beneficiall to the publique weale, nowe they haue 
to this their wrong and vniuste dealinge (whiche is yet 
a muche worse pQinte), geuen the name of iustice t, yea, 
and that by force of a law. 
Therfore when I consider and way in my mind all thies 
commen wealthes which now a dayes any where do 
florish, so god helpe me, I can perceaue nothing but 
a certein conspiracy of riche men, procuringe theire owne 
commodities vnder the name and title of the commen 
wealth. They inuent and deuise all meanes and cra.ftes, 
first how to kipe safely without feare of lesing that they 
haue vniustly gathered together; and next how to hire 
and abuse the woorke and labour of the poore for as Iitle 
modo priuata fraude sed publicis etiam legibus abradunt : ita quod 
ante uidebatur iniustum, optime de Republica meritis pessimam re• 
ferre gratiam, hoc isti deprauatum etiam fecerunt, tum prouulgata 
lege iustitiam. 
1 Burnet gives what must be the 
general sense of this passage : ' So 
that, though it is a Thing most unjust 
in it self, to give such small Rewards 
to those who deserve so well of the 
Publick, yet they have given those 
Hardships the Name and Colour of 
Justice, by procuring Laws to be made for regulating them.' But the Latin 
is obscure, at least if the tuNt before 
proNNigtlltl be correct. 
1 The ablative is apparently due to 
attraction with mq11e just afterwards. 
In this case OfW"J must also be taken 
as ablative. But the proper construc­
tion would be ojlnTI (n. pl.) Gc lt~6on1. 
-
(CB.IX. 
money as may be. Thies deuyses when the riche men 
haue decreed to be kept and obserued for the commen 
wealthes sake •, that is to saye, for the wealth b also of the 
poore people, then they be made Iawes. But thies most 
wicked and vicious men, when they haue by their vnsa­
tiable couetousnes deuided emong them selfes all those 
thinges which wold haue suffised all men, yet howe farre 
be they from the wealth and felicity of the vtopian com­
men wealth ? owt of the which in that all the desire of 
moneye with the vse therof is .vtterly secluded and ban· . 
nisshed, howe great a heape of cares is cut away? How 
great an occasion of wickednes and mischiefe is plucked 
vp by the rotes? For who knoweth not that fraud, theft, 
rauine, brauling, quarelling, brabling, striffe, chiding, con­
tention, murder, treason, poisoning; which by dayly pun· 
ishmentes are rather reuenged then refrained ; do dye 
when money dieth? And also that feare, griefe, care, 
laboures, and watchinges, do perishe, euen the very same 
moment that money perissheth? Yea, pouerty it selfe, 
which only semed to lacke money, if money were gone, it 
also wold decrease and vanishe away. sake] vnder coloure of the comminaltie. 
b [for ••• wealth) omitted. IX.] Of Utopia. 305 
And that you may perceaue this more plainly, con­
sider with your selfes some barrein and vnfrutefull yeare, 
wherin many thousandes of people haue starued for 
honger. I dare be bolde to say, that in the end of that 
penury so much corne or grain might haue bene found 
in the riche mens barnes, if they had bene searched, as 
being deuided emong them, whome famine and pestilence 
hath killed •, no man at all should haue felt that plage and 
penury. So easely might men gett their liuinge, if that 
same worthye princesse, lady money 1, did not alon stoppe 
vp the way betwene vs and our liuing ; whiche a goddes 
name was very excellently deuised and iiluented, that by 
her the way therto should be opened. I am sewer the 
ryche men perceaue thys, nor they be not ignoraunte how 
much better yt werre to lacke noo necessarye thynge then 
to abunde with ouermuch superfluyte ; to be rydde owte 
of innumerable cares and trowbles, then to be beseiged 
wyth b greate ryches. And I dowte not that other the 
respecte of euery mans priuate commoditie, or els the 
aucthority of oure sauioure Christe (which for his great 
• l hath killed] then consumed. " and encombred wyth. There is nothing 
to show that More meant to penonil)-
X fi«N,U. here; and IIMia, in the sense 
of 1 aflluent,' is a common epithet of 
H6trilu, ~. and the like. 
wisdom .could not but know what were best, and for his 
inestimable goodnes cold not but counsell to that which 
he knew to be best) wold haue brought all the wordle 
long agoo into the Iawes .of this weale publique, if it were 
no that one only beast, the prince a and mother of all mis­
chiefe, pride 1, doth withstonde and let it. She measureth 
not wealth and prosperity by here own commodities, but 
by the miseriies and incommodities of other. She wold 
not by her good will be made a goddes, if there were no 
wretches left, whom she might be lady ouer to mocke and 
scorne b; ouer whose miseries her felicity might shine, 
whose pouerty she might vexe, torment, and encrease by 
gorgiously setting furthe her riches. This hell hound 
crepeth in to mens hartes, and plucketh them backe from 
entering the right pathe of liffe; and is so depely roted in 
mens brestes, that she can not be plucked out. 
This forme and fassion of a weale publique, which I 
wold gladly wisshe vnto all nations, I am glad yet that it 
• prlncesse. b [whom ••• scorne] ouer whom she might like a scomeful 
ladie rule and triumph. haec non suis commodis prosperitatem, sed ex alienis 
metitur incommodis. 
1 Dibdin here refers to the chapter 
on Pride in More's treatise D. fiUIIuor 
110uiui,.u, in evidence of the detesta· 
tion in which this vice was held by the author. See the E11gli&ll Wcmb, 
1577, pp. &, 11170; and the eztracta 
given by Bridgett : Wit aruJ Wis.,., 
pp. ss-s&. 
Cit. 
hath chaunced to the Vtopians ; which haue followed those 
institutions of liffe, wherby they haue laid such fondations 
of their common wealth, as shall continew and last, not 
only wealthely, but also, as farre as mans wit maye iudge 
and coniecture, shall endure for euer. For seinge the 
chiefe causes of ambition and sedition with other vices be 
plucked vp by the rootes and abandoned at home, there 
can be no ieopardye of domesticall dissention ; which 
alone hathe caste vnder fote and broughte to noughte the 
well fortefied and strongly defenced wealth and riches 
of many cities. But for asmuch as perfect concord re­
maineth, and holsome Iawes be executed at home, the 
enuy of all forrein princes be not able to shake or moue 
the empire, though they haue many tymes long ago gone 
about to do it, beinge euermore dreuen backe.' 
Thus when Raphaell hadde made an ende of his tale, 
thoughe manye thinges came to my mind which in the 
manners and Iawes of that people semed to be instituted 
and founded of no good reason t, not only in the fassion of 
their cheualry and in their sacrifices and religions, and in 
Vtopiensibus saltern contfgisse gaudeo; qui ea uitae sunt instituta 
sequati, quibus Reipublicae fundamenta iecerunt non modo felicis­
sime, uerum etiam, quantum humana praesagiri coniectura contigit, 
aetemum duratura. 
Haec ubi Raphael recensuit, quanquam baud pauca mihi succurre­
bant, quae in eius populi moribus legibusque perquam absurde 
uidebantur instituta, non solum de belli gerendi ratione, et rebus 
diuinis, ac religione, aliisque insuper eorum institutis, sed in eo 
1 This is weaker than the Latin, JinVN""' allsJmll, 'very absurdly.' 
X2 
308 fltbe •con1J 15oke [Ca. 
other of their lawes, but also, yea and chieffely, in that 
which is the principall fondacion of al their ordinaunces, 
that is to saye, in the communitie of theire liffe and 
liuinge, without anny occupieng of money; by the whyche 
thynge onelye all nobilitie, magnificence, wourship, hon­
our, and maiestie, the true ornamentes and honoures, as 
the common opinion is, of a common wealth, vtterly be 
ouerthrowen and destroyed; yet, bicause I knew that he 
was wery of talkinge, and was not sure whether he coulde 
abide that any thing shoulde be said againste bys minde; 
speciallye bicause I remembred"' that he had reprehended 
this fault in other, which be aferd least they shoulde seme 
not to be wise enough, onles they could find some fault 
in other mens inuentions: therfore I, praising both their 
institutions and his communication, toke him by the hand. 
and led him into supper; saying that we wold chuse an 
other time to way and examine the same matters, and to 
talke wyth him more at lardge therin. Whiche wold to b 
God it might ones come to passe. In the mean time as I 
can not agree and consent to all thinges that he said ; 
being els without dowte a man singulerly well learned, 
and also in all wordely O matters exactely and profoundely 
• speciallye remembrynge. b to 0111il/,d, • worldely. 309 
experienced ; so must I nedes confesse and graunt, that 
many thinges be in the vtopian weal publique, which in 
our cities I may rather wisshe for then hoope after. 
Thus endeth the afternones talke 
of Raphaell Hythlodaye con­
cerning the Iawes and in­
stitutions of the Band 
ofVtopia. 
tl ]mprintell at JL.ontJon 
by Abraham Vele, Elwelling in Pauls 
churcheyarde at the sygne of 
the Lambe. 
SERMONIS POMERIDIANI RAPHAELIS HY 
THLODAEI, DE LEGIBVS ET INSTITV· 
TIS VTOPIENSIS INSVLAE PAVCIS 
ADHVC COGNITAE, PER CLA· 
RISSIMVM ET ERVDITISSI 
MVM VIRVM D